 Panacea
 Money
 On the third day of the epidemic local prices went through the roof; now, on the eighth day, very few people agree to actually trade for money, preferring barter instead. The latter is more cumbersome, but can yield lucrative rewards.
 Oddly enough, money is used to buy items in shops. Offering it during common street barter, however, would be seen as offensive.\n
 Canned Food
 The can is completely airproof, guaranteeing that its contents are uninfected. The food itself is nutritious.
 Nutritious, neatly-packed and well-preserved food that somehow doesn't require a can opener. There's no manufacturer brand on the can and it's far from obvious what type of food is inside.
 Bread
 Bread is the staff of life. No food is more filling.
 Anything that's baked of dough can be called bread. The local variety is greyish in color and crumbly to the touch, making you doubt if it was actually made from grain. Surprisingly delicious though.
 Milk
 Oddly warm and creamy, as though milked minutes ago, this common nourishing drink can often be found as an offering at cemeteries.
 Often used an an offering to the dead, milk serves as a reminder that all that is born must come to an end. It's so popular in the town that cream separators can be found even in the households that seemingly have nothing to do with the local Bull Project.
 Walnut
 While nuts can be munched down, they do little to sate hunger. Why then do the local kids' eyes light up when they see one?
 Used in the most popular game among local children, nuts are forbidden in the Polyhedron, where most of the kids fled from the plague. The "voices of nuts" were said to make the facets of the Polyhedron resonate in a bad way.
 Peanuts
 While nuts can be munched down, they do little to sate hunger. Why then do the local kids' eyes light up when they see one?
 Used in the most popular game among local children, nuts are forbidden in the Polyhedron, where most of the kids fled from the plague. The "voices of nuts" were said to make the facets of the Polyhedron resonate in a bad way.
 Chestnuts
 While chestnuts are nuts, they're unedible without cooking. The local children still take a keen interest in them. 
 Despite the lack of chestnut trees around, chestnuts are omnipresent in the town. Where do they come from?
 Raisins
 Formerly juicy berries, currently a luxurious treat that leaves one's mouth sugary when eaten.
 A luxurious imported treat. The locals refuse to eat more than a couple at a time; perhaps this has to do with the fact that raisins do not spoil and thus become the only treat available during food shortages.
 Cracker
 Soldier food. There's no reason to prefer it to freshly baked bread.
 Leaving bread to go stale or dry is heavily frowned upon. Crackers arrived to the town with soldiers' rations and remain unpopular despite being decently filling.
 Water Bottle
 Seemingly sates hunger a bit. Despite the town standing on the river Gorkhon, fresh drinking water is a rare commodity here.
 Fresh water is brought to the town daily from a spring in the steppe and distributed among the households by water-bearers. The Gorkhon water was proven to be clean, but the locals refuse to drink it.
 Immune Boosters
 Assorted pills of unknown origin. Boost immunity. Side effects include nausea and the inability to smell almonds.
 Scientifically speaking, it is dubious whether immunity can be boosted at all. However, these pills work infallibly. According to the box, they were manufactured more than fifty years ago.
 Antibiotic
 The best way not to get infected is to be dead. Antibiotics, that lower infection at the price of general health. are the first step in that direction.
 "Bios" means life, which encompasses all that is living, including both the harmful bacteria and humans. Antibiotics attack both. The difference is that while they can kill a person dead, a couple of bacteria always escapes their assault, so it's impossible to cure yourself fully with antibiotics only.
 Morphine
 A person is only alive for as long as they feel pain. Morphine makes you numb to it, seemingly increasing health.
 Unsuccessfully banned within the limits of the town by governor Saburov, who was trying to alleviate his wife's addiction, morphine relieves a person of pain, worries, and wordly desires, leaving them in a drowsy and numb state.
 Executor Mask
 Protective headwear. Replaces all smells with that of the healing herbs placed in the beak. 
 The mask of Muu Shubuun, "the wicked bird"; part of the Reaper costume from the local theatre. Impossible to see through, it's actually mounted above an actor's head, making them peek through a hole in the cloak.
 Executor Cloak
 Protective garment. The pendants serve no obvious purpose, yet it loses its protective qualities if stripped of them.
 Orderlies—the volunteer medical assistants—use the costumes borrowed from the local theatre as protective cloaks. This is the traditional costume of the Reaper, an allegory of Death.
 Cothurni
 Protective footwear. Rising above your troubles (and the plague-soaked ground) is as simple as wearing these theatrical shoes.
 Cothurni—unusual footwear that elevates the wearer hight above the ground—are popular with the local theatre. It is likely that the orderlies owe their awe-inspiring height to them.
 Leather Gloves
 Protective handwear. The local leatherworks are a less-known branch of Fat Vlad's Bull Project.
 Leather gloves are still associated with the desire not to leave fingerprints, which is, to say the least, shady. A small price to pay when dealing with something extremely unpleasant to the touch.
 Face Mask
 A basic protective item that covers the face.
 Common among medical personnel, this protective mask accumulates infection fast, quickly becoming a hazard in and of itself, and muffles speech. Still, better than nothing.
 A run-of-the-mill medicine vial filled with clotty reddish liquid that vaguely smells of spices. It seems distantly familiar.
 Shortly before his tragic demise, Artemy Burakh, a local pellar, claimed to have produced a miraculous cure capable of erasing the sand plague completely from one's body. Until now, his claims remained unproven. This may be the only sample in existence.
 Bandage
 Common bandages stop bleeding or can be fashioned into a makeshift noose if you've contracted the sand plague.
 It is common folk knowledge that any affliction can be overcome with the application of bandage and that any decently soft and clean cloth can serve as one. Makes one wonder how the people with such advanced medical knowledge even get sick at all.
 Tourniquet
 Used to repair health. Rubber tourniquets are regarded as poor-quality by the towsfolk, who prefer the locally-made leather ones.
 The rumor that General Block, the chief commanding officer of the soldiers deployed to the town, hanged himself on a noose made of tourniquets rather than succumb to the disease, is absurd and unfounded. This rubber band can't support the weight of a grown man.
 Key
 It's cold.
 The light reflects from it at odd angles, making one unable to discern the size of this key.
 Lockpick
 Twisted an uneven, the local lockpicks require a fast, jabbing motion to unlock a door, else they'll become uncoiled.
 It is said that Clara the Changeling, a thief girl who claims to be blessed, can open any door just as easily as she heals the sick, by laying on hands. Why are her pockets always filled with lockpicks then?
 Beetle
 A surprising, if useless, find in autumn.
 Some fifteen years ago, the Soul-and-a-Halves, the gang of children who are defined by sharing special bonds with their pets, actually considered to allow flower chafers as their "Halves" due to the beeltes "looking as though they knew something". The idea was quickly abandoned as ridiculous.
 Package
 The steppe people bury the remains of their dead in small packages. This is hardly one of them, but you'd rather not check.
 Long before the current socioeconomic catastrophe, the local townsfolk developed a tradition of barter that the whole community revelled in. Including many types, such as "tit for tat" and "retrab", it is sometimes secret, with people swapping wrapped items blindly.
 Match
 Long or short? Draw the short one!
 One must remember that which is most dear to them before the match burns out, or else the whole thing won't work.
 Spindle
 It has almost run out of thread.
 One can hardly jab a finger with this thing on accident. However, a hand can probably be puctured through by it, if enough pressure is applied.
 Candle Stub
 The stub of a nupital candle. It smells of earth.
 Eva Yan, the mistress of the Stillwater, often burned candles in the study during the night, which gave her observatory-like mansion a cozier appearance. After Eva's tragic suicide, candles can no longer be lit in the Stillwater and go out immediately.
 Used Bandage
 The traces of the epidemic are omnipresent.
 According to the sanitary procedures, any object that bears the traces of a deceased person's blood must be burned. According to the local belief, it's pointless since the blood would simply appear elsewhere.
 Broken Ampoule
 People would use any and all means possible to cure themselves of the disease.
 An ampoule that used to contain either life-saving or life-ending drug, served its purpose (whatever it was), and has now become completely useless.
 Powder
 The box seems to be filled with powder made of assorted ground pills. It's hard to picture a person who would produce such a mixture.
 Powders, or "shmowders", as the kids call them, can sometimes cure any disease completely. Or at least they used to; Khan, the children's leader who now rules the Polyhedron, claims that all the real "shmowders" were used up long before the epidemic.
 Bull Bell
 Did it bring luck to the one who wore it?
 The inner surface of this bell is flecked with the sigils of the secret and sacred steppe alphabet. It is the knowledge of this alphabet that allowed Artemy Burakh, a local pellar, to restore his rightful place in the steppe community—shortly before his tragic death.
 Pocket Watch
 Recently stopped. This means that the owner has most likely died.
 TIme doesn't seem to be working properly in the town; there's no other explanation to the fact that Georgiy Kain, the Judge, is two times younger than his twin brother. The Kains' fascination with all things clockwork must have something to do with this.
 Broken Scissors
 The Moerae must have been in a hurry—too many threads to cut these days.
 It is said that Clara the Changeling, a thief girl who claims to be a saint, can repair any sharp object just as easily as she cures the sand pest—by simply laying her hands on it. Perhaps this is the reason why people refuse to throw away useless junk like broken scissors.
 Fishing Hooks
 Sharp objects are regarded as dangerous and thus frowned upon by the locals.
 While the Gorkhon river has plenty of fish, fishing is for some reason unpopular among the locals. Perhaps it has to do with the fact that hooks are sharp objects, which are heavily frowned upon around here.
 Marbles
 Children give them names, as though they were alive, and believe them to hold memories.
 No one knows how exactly marbles appear in the town. No one delivers or makes them. They simply pop up here and there; on the floor, under the pillow, or right on the ground.
 Heart
 A warm heart that went out to people. Literally.
 In the steppe lore, the center of mind and knowledge is the liver, while the center of feeling and emotion is the lower guts. They view the heart as a less crucial and rather mechanical organ that simply pumps life around, oddly arriving at a consensus with science-based medicine.
 Liver
 Cutting open any bodies, including human, is taboo in our town. According to the "Baur Meges" steppe myth, the wholeness, harmony, and finiteness of the body are sacred. Only a person who possesses knowledge has the caste right to break this wholeness. Such people are allowed to work as doctors, butchers, or tattoo makers.
 A human liver.
 Kidney
 Kidney
 A human kidney.
 A human kidney.
 According to the steppe beliefs, the body is a perfect representation of the Universe. However, the steppe people are not so naive as to correlate organs and bones to cosmic or geographical features. What they refer to are, first and foremost, connections and circulations.
 According to the steppe beliefs, the body is a perfect representation of the Universe. However, the steppe people are not so naive as to correlate organs and bones to cosmic or geographical features. What they refer to are, first and foremost, connections and circulations.
 Brain
 A section of brain tissue.
 Among medical conditions, the gravest and most dangerous are those that destroy consciousness, thought, and perception. The key to defeating any unknown disease is in the head.
 Revolver
 A six-chambered military-grade revolver.
 The civil war has been going on for more than two years now. The hostility has mostly passed out hellhole by, but refugees and deserters keep bringing military-grade equipment to the furthest parts of the country.
 Bullet
 Revolver ammo.
 Black powder. A lead flat-nosed bullet. It's heavy, weighing more than 17 grams. Contrary to the popular belief, doesn't always find its billet.
 Empty Flask
 An empty flask made of thick glass.
 Flasks are rarely used to store water—they are better suited for thicker liquids, like mercury, oil, or blood. 
 Blood-filled Flask
 A blood-filled flask.
 At a low temperature liquid blood can be preserved for up to three weeks, with enough red cells surviving. At a different temperature blood needs to be transfused within an hour. Blood used for tests remains usable for a day. 
 Chalk
 A piece of chalk. Rough and unpleasant to the touch.
 The locals inexplicably detest chalk. Despite its eye-catching whiteness, it is considered unclean and is popularly associated with bad omens and doom. Chalk-marked train cars are washed with river water before they are unloaded.
 Empty Bottle
 A clean bottle. Can be filled with water.
 No one drinks water from the Gorkhon river in our town, which is quite sensible. No one digs wells either, which is less so. Clear drinkable water is not a luxury, but is valued. It is brought from the steppe, and people can often tell which spring it is from by the taste.
 
 
 
 
 Meradorm
 Meradorm has a strong sedative effect and induces sleep even during excruciating pain. 
 Meradorm has a strong sedative effect and induces sleep even during excruciating pain. 
 Twyrine
 A strong infusion of the oxitocia tvirinum herb. Boosts immunity. Acts as an analgesic, restores strength during sleep. According to elder locals, critical doses of twyrine can alter the effects of infection. Some of the effects of twyrine are still unknown.
 A strong infusion of the oxitocia tvirinum herb. Boosts immunity. Acts as an analgesic, restores strength during sleep. According to elder locals, critical doses of twyrine can alter the effects of infection. Some of the effects of twyrine are still unknown.
 White Vaccine
 The final variant of the "organic vaccine". A unique prophylactic drug based on a live culture of the Sand Plague. 
 The final variant of the "organic vaccine". A unique prophylactic drug based on a live culture of the Sand Plague. 
 We shall speak later. We have much to talk about. Not here.
 Greetings, ekhene, how fares your kine? Who might you be?
 Did you come to pay respects to my father?
 Mind me not. Your Khatanghe, your people, are over there. Burying your father.
 What about you?
 Very well.
 I have paid my respects already. I came here to watch you. To see what you do. I wait for your word, emshen. Then I shall give you mine.
 What am I <i>supposed</i> to do?
 Why can't they bury him?
 They will tell you. Then you will reply. I watch.
 Okay, watch.
 …
 You will soon know.
 Another riddle…
 Fine.
 What do you make of this, emshen?
 They're talking about an inescapable obligation, a bond… Do you know anything about it?
 Seems like Father owed a lot. But… to whom?
 No.
 Then who does?
 How can I take such an obligation upon myself? What if I fail to meet it?
 You choose. So, what is your choice? Who do you release him to? Sky or Earth?
 What does this choice even mean?
 I am afraid of taking on his burden. I give him to the Sky.
 To the Earth, of course. My father's burden is my burden… Whatever it may be.
 To burn him is to release him to Sky. An old, lowly rite. A rite for the impure, unkind, disloyal… in times past. Now, they often burn paupers. Not a dishonorable rite.\nTo give him to Earth is better. The wise say: "Earth returns our dead to us as kind boons." What choose you?
 It's hardly a choice. I honor my father.
 How can I take such an obligation upon myself? What if I fail to meet it?
 Then go, and tell them so.
 I will.
 Wait for me here.
 The wise say: "Who can part the fog of time?" "What if" is a weakness.
 Very well. I've made up my mind.
 Then I am weak. I don't want this burden.
 You are a brave man, emshen. A true son to your father. I rejoice as I watch you. The Khatanghe—the Kin—shed tears of pride and delight as they watch you.
 I'm afraid.
 Thank you, khetey.
 What is fate, emshen? The wise say: "A fate is like a good wife; no one can make you take one, but it is a boon to have one, as long as your love is sincere."\nBut you are a free man. You make your own choices. Your father appreciated freedom.
 Freedom has a steep price.
 I don't want to follow along on his trail. I'll find my own.
 "Khetey" means "sister-elder." Is that what you mean to call me? Bayarlaa, thank you. You still remember something of your people's ways?
 Yes.
 I remember… very little.
 We shall bear your burden together, emshen. Your father helped me; I helped him. I shall help you, too. In you, I see him.
 Don't. I'll bear my burdens alone.
 I always act first and think later, ekhene. Got the scars to prove it.
 Your father was a wise man. But he wasted not his time on doubting. He acted instead of brooding. That's why his works were great, and many…\nHe who lives cautiously, pacing circles in his own head, spares himself, but wastes those he loves… and those who love him.
 Very well. Consider me comforted.
 I did the right thing. That is what my heart tells me.
 Follow me, emshen. You are now to come into your legacy.
 Okay.
 To you, she might have been kind. Warming your bed, stoking your hearth, bearing your children. But a stranger, she might hate and torment. Whoever claims her, will pay terribly. Heed this warning.
 Are you talking about yourself? Do you plan to claim my, uh, fate?
 Maybe, maybe.
 Guess I'll have to keep an eye on you, too.
 But we hardly know each other, Sahba.
 I leave you to your grief, now. Come to my home if you need me. I will wait for you, night and day. For as long as I remain, tangher, I will stand behind your shoulder.
 Let's go.
 I have devils enough on my shoulder. But… fine.
 Don't, Sahba. I want nothing to do with the Kin. I don't need you either.
 I am sorry about Isidor. But we have not the time to grieve. Here's what matters: You are now to take your father's legacy. <i>Take it,</i> mind. Not <i>come into it.</i>
 Pardon me, what?
 Maybe I don't even want to take it.
 What do you mean, we "have not the time"? I've got all the time in the world.
 You have ten days. Trust me—I foresee ten. Be khara, great troubles—a khayud—are upon us. Death already nests in four houses. Soon, it will crawl out upon the town—decimate it, then halve it. \nThe wise say: "The sky is falling; where will you hide when it pins you down?"
 What kind of khayud?
 Who are you, anyway?
 Here—I'm giving you his udhar, his "warm vessel." He gave it to me on the eve of his last holiday. Must have presaged the evil that would befall him.
 You're right, he must have. That's why he summoned me to the town…
 Why you?
 What do you mean by "warm vessel"?
 I know not. But be it war, rebellion, plague, or simple misfortune, who cares? You have greater things to worry about now.
 Like what?
 Is this another premonition? Or do you know for sure?
 You are an odd one, emshen. You were brought up here, yet came of age far away. Neither fish, nor fowl… Well, let us hope that your blood calls to you.\nAn udhar is a vessel where a man keeps all that is important to him. The things that… how do you say "gyur"? Things that preserve his essence. You will, someday, make one of your own.
 I'm not fond of material possessions.
 Ah… Yes, I seem to recall that idea.
 I am Sahba Usp'tae. I sense the will of Earth. Your father made me. Named me. Trusted me.
 Very well. So…?
 I suppose I will trust you, too.
 I'm giving you his udkhar. It's yours, now. As are the things inside. Now, the money… It's a light purse, isn't it? Your father didn't care much for money.
 Okay. You said I would "take" my legacy, but not "come into it." What did you mean by that?
 Listen, khetey, I don't want it. I refused his obligations, so it would be unfitting for me to accept his belongings.
 Is this pride I hear from you? Still your blood, emshen. Whatever he owed, it is not the same as what he owned. There's no need for a tantrum, and you know not what comes next… Perhaps you will change your mind.
 Why would I?
 To take someone's obligations, word is not enough. To come into a legacy, taking the <i>things</i> is not enough. Your father's bequeathal is more than merely material.
 Yes, I gathered as much. But what do I need to do?
 What else, then?
 His fate. His place… in the Kin. In our hearts. And in our follies.
 That is exactly what I <i>don't</i> want to take on.
 I can't replace him.
 I see.
 There is now emptiness where he once was. Who is to fill it? Who will heal the sick? Tell truth from lies? Who will… "kharaa," who will plumb the depths?\nOnly a menkhu can cut a body. Only a menkhu can pierce the unknown. Who will draw the Lines?
 I don't care about any of that. I only want to find my father's killer.
 All this menkhu talk is just a relic of a bygone age. Father was fond of it, yes. But the Kin are extinct.
 The "wise" say it, yes? I knew it would come down to more old wives' tales.
 You are wrong. Look at the items I'm giving you.\nOpen the udkhar and touch those items.
 …
 Do any of these items seem familiar?
 What are they…? Swevery, various kinds of twyre… Herbs. Why would he leave me herbs?
 He used to make herbal medicine. Tinctures to cure any malady…\nHe was a menkhu. A knower of connections. He saw which things sing in unison when joined. That's what the Lines are—even if you say you need not this knowledge… emshen.
 And what about this list of names?
 You speak differently. More like a normal townsperson. I thought you were one of the Kin?
 Closer, let my tired eyes see it… The names of local children… Khan is what they call the Kain boy. Capella is the daughter of the Master, may he choke on his name. But I know not why Isidor listed them.
 Perhaps my father looked after them?
 I know some of these children already.
 Hm… He did pay much attention to these children. Spent most of his final days with them. They followed him, like calves that trailed after a cow, or oxen pulled by a yoke.
 His last days, you say… Wait. That's a lead I can follow!
 Okay. How about this sigil here?
 Which ones?
 Notkin leads a gang that keeps invisible pets. Mature for his age.
 Murky's an orphan. She lives by the railroad.
 Grace takes care of the cemetery.
 Olgimskaya is indeed Fat Vlad's daughter. She doesn't take after her father, though.
 Sticky's an urchin. I think he's my very own squatter, now.
 You think one of them has something to do with his death? Doubtful… They're still just children. Then again, children hold so much power in this town that it wouldn't surprise me…\nBut they loved him, they did. No, I believe it not.
 I can also see something else on that list... an eighth item. Some sort of sigil. Does it also refer to a child?
 This is a brand for marking bulls. But brands of the Kin often have specific meanings. \nBe khara, this one is "udurgh." Tough to parse… It means something like "a big body," or "a special body." "A body that contains a lot." But I'm not sure. It may be just a sigil.
 Who could interpret this for me?
 Bayarlaa, Sahba. I have now come into my legacy.
 I am your father not, kholboön. I can instruct you not. You are to learn on your own. Speak to people. Most of all, speak to those who knew your father well.\nThat is how you may come into your legacy.
 What do you mean?
 Are you, once again, hinting that I am to follow in my father's footsteps? I will not. I make my own fate.
 In this place, you must come into your legacy through action, not mere words. By showing you understand the contents of the vessel. Follow your father's trails. Learn who he was. Find yourself a fate.\nA fate like a good wife, emshen. Your wife.
 Sounds good, but…
 I choose to walk my own trails, khetey.
 …You are to come into your inheritance, emshen. I change for you; take root on your path. Khaya dee, thank you for this.
 Thank <i>you.</i> Anyway, who are the people listed on the piece of paper?
 Follow his trails, emshen. Then you will know what kind of man he was. And what kind of man you are to become.
 Do you know what kind of man he was?
 Let me start with you. What can you tell me about him?
 Your father was a menkhu. He was respected for it.
 A "menkhu"?
 He was respected because he was a doctor.
 He knew the Lines.
 What Lines?
 Lines, that's just a philosophy. Like the Tao, or phenomenology…
 What's a "tao"?
 Never mind. What are the Lines, in your interpretation?
 Lines represent the paths between things. The links that connect them. The laws that govern our lives.\nBetween evil Sky and kind Earth is a Line. The veins of our lifeblood are Lines. A Line carries the inevitable retribution for evil deeds. Family ties, the way children reflect their parents… Those are Lines, too.
 Father used to say that Lines referred to anatomy.
 Everything is connected to everything else in some way, Sahba. Hence me pointing out this is a useless philosophy.
 Everything is connected? No son of Isidor would utter such drivel. It reaches my ears not! 
 Father was a doctor, not a philosopher. He knew how to heal.
 That, as well. He knew how a body is composed because he knew the Lines. He knew how a kidney links to an herb, so he could brew a curative tea from it. He knew how one herb linked to another. He knew how to draw a knife to cut a body, but bring no harm.
 Yes. He did indeed know all of that.
 I see.
 More than that…
 What else, then?
 Fine. And also because he was a just and dutiful man.
 Hence me saying that you will only come into your legacy if you follow his trail. Do what he used to. All you Burakhs are alike… Men of action.\nI have told you all I know, emshen. Be on your way, now.
 Farewell, Sahba. And thank you… Bayarlaa. May your kine fatten.
 My head's spinning from all this… That's enough for a day.
 Now hear me well, emshen, for my next words are crucial. This first couple of days will be hardest for you. \nYou will find yourself surrounded by Lines innumerable. Some you must tear apart; others, follow; others still, cut yourself. Only thus will you reach the end.
 And I feel that end is nigh…
 I have taken your words to heart, khetey. Douse your eyes.
 Well, one thing is clear: You are a very, very lucky man. Which means you need to take care of yourself! You are so careless, Vorakh. It's Artemy Vorakh, right?
 Burakh. Artemy Burakh.
 And you are…?
 Daniil Dankovsky, Bachelor of Medicine, at your service. But before we speak any further, I'd like to clarify a rather crucial thing: Just how highly do you hold your sense of duty?
 Too highly, clearly, since it brought me back to this wretched town…
 Why do you ask?
 All Burakhs are guided by duty. It runs in the family.
 Daniil Dankovsky, Bachelor of Medicine. At your service.
 But where's Rubin? This place used to belong to a friend of mine.
 My dear fellow, Rubin is no friend of yours! Quite the opposite, actually. Any observer could deduce that your hypothetical meeting would have… little to no chance of ending well.
 What? Why?
 But he's not just a friend. He's my best friend.
 And what the hell are you doing here, buddy?
 Well, from this point on, you—ahem—<i>owe me.</i> I just saved you from a rather grisly fate!
 I don't remember seeing a rescue team.
 Perhaps I'll repay you in kind someday.
 Your Rubin has utterly murderous intents. Isidor meant quite a lot to him! Your father was his mentor. Rubin even considers himself old Burakh's true son… Unlike you. \nAnyway, he thinks you're to blame for your father's death.
 What a load of…!
 Wait… My father is dead?
 I managed to convince him that you didn't actually kill Isidor. Well, not empirically! \nBut I'm under the impression that, in Rubin's mind, you still caused your father's death. You did, after all, take your sweet time getting here… while Isidor was counting on your help. Is that true?
 …It is. I've thought about that myself.
 No, it's not. And I sense some foul play in your valiant attempt to save me from my best friend.
 Trying to guilt-trip me, huh? That's clever. What a learned man you are.
 Look, you have my condolences, Vorakh. But since we've established that you owe me, let me explain how you'll repay your debt. Things are about to get a little tense, and I need only one thing: Just do <i>exactly as I tell you.</i> \nYou're a doctor, right?
 Burakh. How are things going to get tense?
 I'm a surgeon. A good one, too.
 We haven't "established" that I owe you anything, buddy.
 Today's tragedy won't be the last. I was blessed with a naturally high intelligence, and my observations indicate that a very deadly visitor has come to this god-forsaken town. \nThat's all I can say for now.
 …I don't like you, Bachelor Whatever.
 Allow me to sum up. Rubin told me he's the only decent doctor in town, but you're a competent surgeon! I need you alive, healthy, and quiet. Close at hand. \nSpare me any wild improvisations—I'll be the one handling the situation. Medicum morbo adhibere.
 How about you just shut up? I'll deal with Rubin myself. No middlemen required. Where is he?
 I always sucked at this stupid language. I'll assume that was an apology.
 I need to see if you're any good first. For now, cheers.
 Qui habet aures, audiat… As the saying goes.
 …I don't like you, Bachelor Whatever.
 Amaa tat, khonzohon, as goes the local one.
 Oh, he was killed tonight. Didn't you know?
 No…
 Liar! Everything you've said is a lie!
 Oh, I doubt it. I'm much more cautious than you. And attentive. And heedful. For example, I've managed to establish a friendly relationship with Rubin, your so-called friend.
 But Rubin <i>is</i> my friend.
 And was that hard?
 Gone to carry out my orders! From now on, your Rubin does what I tell him to do. He entered my service of his own accord. \nI suggest that you do the same. It will help everyone.
 I just hate big-city dandies who think they know best.
 Stubbornness is my guiding star, second only to my sense of duty. I suggest you put your high intelligence to good use and get out of my way, Bachelor.
 Apologies. Oh, and may I ask… Is it true that your actions have already resulted in four deaths?
 I'm not in the habit of spilling my guts to strangers. Especially when they can't even remember my name.
 Three.
 Are you a detective?
 That's what I thought.
 And who the hell are you, buddy?
 Back so soon, Burakh? I hope there's a good reason.
 The kids outside told me that three of their friends are at death's door… and you refused to help.
 My dear fellow, that sounds like your area of expertise. You're welcome to offer them your services! I have better things to do than waste my time on a bunch of mangy mutts.
 "Better things to do"? You took the oath—now do your duty!
 "Mutts," huh? Well, now I know where you stand. I'd break your jaw, buddy, if my hand didn't hurt so much…
 You have a kind heart, Burakh.
 No, but I do have <i>a</i> heart, at least.
 Leave this town, Bachelor. We were better off without you.
 My duty is quite different. And if you keep wasting my time, I might fail to perform it.
 I'm not wasting your time!
 We have a very different idea of what duty is.
 Why are you here?
 Wrong question. Why are <i>you</i> here?
 I live here.
 Do you really want to know?
 Unfortunately, this house is sealed off. I'm sorry, Burakh… It <i>is</i> Burakh, isn't it?
 Let me guess. You were the one who sealed it off?
 Quite.
 Well, I come bearing a sanitary order. So I'm here to examine and quarantine the place.
 You won't like it in there.
 Hospitality is an important tradition in my family. But to you, I'll deny it.
 I'd prefer to, yes.
 I was examining the scene of my father's death.
 This is my house.
 Just wanted to make sure nobody was… nosing around the place.
 Why?
 I don't like you, Bachelor Whatever.
 This just isn't the right moment for it.
 Daniil Dankovsky, at your service.
 Just get lost.
 Wrong. This is the critical moment. I would actually go so far as to say that this house needs to be locked down immediately. Every minute counts.
 Bullshit.
 Really? Why?
 It's a bit untidy.
 The air inside is… unhealthy, somehow. It might irritate your tender skin.
 Something's wrong in there.
 Because this is my house, and I'm not letting you in.
 Is that so? Still, with your kind permission, I insist on examining the place. \nEven your unkind permission would do. But if you struggle to provide even that, I'll do fine without your consent at all. I hope I don't need to threaten you at gunpoint?
 To hell with you. Do whatever you want.
 I warned you.
 Go ahead, then. Examine the place. And if you can explain what's going on here, be so kind as to tell me, too.
 Yes, I bear the unfortunate burden of this responsibility. But lighten up! This is all for the best.
 Where is my father's body?
 "For the best"? <i>For the—</i>well, up yours! This is <i>my</i> house, you insufferable fop, and—
 I don't have that information.
 …So where do I go now?
 —and yet, for the reasons that I cannot currently disclose to you, the house is still under a temporary quarantine.
 …So where do I go now?
 Well, take a look at these. I found some papers inside, and a key. I suppose they belong to you now. Hopefully the papers can explain what the key unlocks.
 That's something, I guess.
 I could definitely use a roof over my head…
 Well, look who's entered my humble home! Could that be my pal Artemy the Artist? The Artemy who cuts arteries, maybe?\nNo… I don't recognize this man. Too soft. They must have kept him swaddled an' coddled, whatever palace he ran off for.
 "Palace"? I left for school.
 Knew you'd end up like this.
 Good to see you, too.
 Climbin' the ladder, then?
 If only.
 Not the same one you're on.
 End? The end comes when your limbs don't bend, ha, an' I'm still nimble, friend. Y'know who folks want to end? You.
 How come?
 A li'l bird told me you're a hard-boiled criminal now. I'll admit, old friend, I got misty-eyed with pride. Lucky for you, I can store you anywhere in the Warehouses, an' no quail nor nightingale would sing a tune.
 You're a storekeeper?
 I'm not some product.
 It was self-defense.
 Not a keeper of stores, but stories. This town, this great machine, the gears don't turn on their own, no, not till they're slick with secrets.
 Verbose nonsense. I know what you do.
 Fine. Your business, not mine.
 You're no fun. Aren't you happy to see an old friend?
 You've become… important.
 Oddly enough, I am.
 Just say what you mean, Artemy, an' call me a thief. Y'know, we'll all reap what we sow. Do you honestly resent me? …In truth, I work for Fat Vlad. Keepin' tabs on the Warehouses.
 Gathered that much. You're a storekeeper, then?
 Forget it. Tell me this, friend. What's your plan?
 My plan? …Why do you ask like that?
 Do you know about my father's murder?
 Odd indeed. Why so cheery?
 You're going to help me. You know about my father's death, don't you?
 This place brings back memories.
 I do. May he rest in peace. He was a decent man, an' the best sawbones around.
 You honor him.
 Do you know who murdered him?
 …Cub, your old man got killed. This night. You haven't heard?
 What? You're lying!
 I have.
 What's the plan, then? Revenge? Or somethin' with a li'l more finesse?
 Revenge.
 I'll find out who's behind this. Then, we'll see.
 Nope. Sniffin' the ground ourselves. You didn't think it was one of mine? Listen, we don't cut folks. We honor tradition.\nAlthough… there was one fella, Barley, he left our little community a month back, an' got himself a new one. Now, they do cut folks, but they wouldn't touch your old man. They aren't fools.
 I'll admit, I did suspect one of yours.
 Seems there must be at least one fool in town.
 Hell, Artemy! Half the town wants your head over this, those fools. Ah, easy to fix. Give me a li'l time.
 …I don't believe you.
 Go ahead, if you want.
 No. I'll fix this mess myself.
 Just stay away from Saburov. I mean it, Cub—the man's a hawk, all might makes right, no sense. He'll throw you in jail first an' only think months later…\nI know your thick skull, too! You'd charge in there, shoulders squared, thinking, oh, the truth will win out! Bullshit. <i>Stay away.</i> Y'hear me?
 Are you finished? Calm down!
 Mind your own skull, all right?
 You run into the old crowd? Stakh Rubin, Lara?
 Haven't seen them around.
 I've been to Rubin's. He's not home.
 I've seen Lara. She's… different.
 Gotta say, it's a tough time for our friendship—I mean, if you can even call this friendship.\nGravel-hearted Lara won't look at me now, an' Stakh's even worse. He completely ignored my plea for help!
 You need help?
 Some people certainly have short memories.
 You gone outside recently? It's chaos! Innocent souls torn limb from limb! Everyone's lost their minds hunting the culprit—a steppe golem, some think, but others? They're after <i>your</i> hide, friend.\nAll this going on, naturally, my men ran into a mob. Barely got out alive. They need a sawbones, bad. Your old man's gone, an' his star student Stakh won't take the job, so…
 People mistook your men for me? Each and every one of them?
 Something tells me your men weren't out there feeding the poor.
 Let me patch them up. I <i>am</i> a surgeon, after all. Are your men still here?
 Not here. Shiner dropped by, said they're waitin' for death in a hideout.\nPoor Piecework, he's knockin' on heaven's door. Got somethin' stuck in the belly. Can you believe folks? They're all shapeshifters, I swear, sheddin' skin an' eatin' each other. May not look it, but every person in this town has a vile beast inside.
 I need tools. Don't have any on me.
 Hell if I know! Can't make heads or tails of 'em now. If you squint, Piecework does kinda resemble you—a sturdy man. Perhaps he did take a few hits to the noggin in your stead. How do you feel about that?
 About guilt trips? I don't like them.
 I could look at Piecework. Where is he?
 Tools! Got you all set, friend. Blessed be the Warehouses, the wellspring of goods—including illegal ones. There! Take a peek inside that crate, an' choose anything your heart desires. \nAlthough… maybe you should stick around. Dangerous out.
 Knock it off. Not like I can stay here forever. I'll drop by the patient when I'm in the area.
 Fair enough.
 Wonderful. You find anything in his belly he doesn't need, don't toss it! Bring it to me. Might be useful.
 What, like a memento? …You're still a weird one. Bred in the bone, I suppose.
 Depends what I find. Might very well keep it myself.
 "Let us rest on the mountain, oh, let us rest by the river…" That's the song your people sing when times are hard, isn't it?\n…How's Piecework? I assume he kicked the bucket.
 …He meant nothing to you, then? Great.
 No, I patched Piecework back together.
 Cub, my friend! You didn't mess around in school, huh? An' to hell with Stakh, let him sulk. He only makes it worse for himself.
 So what's the plan now?
 Huh? Did he not say please an' thank you, or somethin'?
 Your man Piecework is trash. He got cut for burning a woman.
 …Oh. Folks have lost their minds, I'm tellin' you, an' Piecework's never been friends with his own head. What'd you do to him?
 I patched him up. You know why? I want to see what <i>you'll</i> do with him.
 He's dead, friend. You told me cut out anything he didn't need, so I cut it all out.
 …So you're a funny man, huh? A funny man. Gotta keep my eyes peeled around you. Great. Wonderful.
 So what's the plan now?
 You caught my drift, Grigory. You'll want to watch your back. See you around.
 The plan is to live. Live an' breathe, an' thieve, an' leave…\nWhat'd you find inside Piecework? Just curious.
 This. Your men are fond of shivs, huh? Even an incendiary bullet would be less cruel.
 Well, that's people for you. I'd been wondering what our kind townsfolk fashion those li'l barbs from. I see, I see… This explains who broke into Warehouse Eight, last week. The thread unravels… I'll make a note of this.\nIf you find more shivs, bring them to me. Don't give them to the kids, even if they offer bullets.
 Bullets?
 Kids?
 I know. I've been offered a good deal.
 Those kids have some nerve. Armed to the teeth, playin' at war. They carved off a nice slice of turf while you were gone.\nWon't be long till li'l Kain starts pushin' us around. Look, point is, they'll offer you loot they stole from me in exchange for pointy things. Premium items. Don't be a shit. Just come see me.
 Premium?
 I don't need premium. It's all contraband.
 I got myself a nice li'l business. You need weapons, or anythin' illegal, come see me. I'll let you peek below the counter. Nothing for free, of course.\nNo discounts, either. My men wouldn't respect that. Be glad I trust you enough to make any deals. So, what'll it be?
 I'll keep that in mind.
 You're too kind.
 Show me.
 An' here comes Artemy, Artemy of the Academy! What do you need?
 Any insight on what's going on around town?
 If you think I'm so out of place, I can leave.
 Oh, sure, I've got insight. Got everything in sight. Death has his hands full… Our grand leader Simon drew his last breath. \nWhat else do you want to know about? The bosses an' their schemes, or the rumor mill?
 The… bosses, sure. Tell me the balance of power.
 The rumor mill.
 Still the same. Saburov the hawk is in charge, but he's all squawk, ha. \nThe Kains, as usual, rack their brains on how to move the town downriver. Quacks, all. The Tower already floats! Mark my words, they'll hang the next district in the clouds. \nAs for the Master… well, he's the Master.
 You mean Fat Vlad?
 Sure do. He's sittin' pretty, the ugly bastard. Put me at the heart of the Warehouses. No complaints here. Quaint li'l abode, an' under my feet, a whole railroad. You don't bother Vlad an' he won't bother you, neither.
 He's a scumbag.
 He's a moneybag first an' foremost, friend. He runs this whole machine. Feeds the Town. Allows us to earn our keep. \nNot just me, but everyone here. How many folks work at the cannery? At the Station? The Warehouses alone house four hundred. An' everyone gets paid solid coin.
 Yeah, "coin." Just one. Barely enough to survive.
 And that's how he justifies all this exploitation…
 I guess.
 Guesswork will get you nowhere, friend. Leave Fats alone. He's on a roll, an' anyone not on his payroll will get stomped flat, ha.
 True.
 He wants <i>something</i> from me, but I have no idea what.
 You steppe people, all you know is herdin' cows an' pushin' plows. \nWe have to look to tomorrow, Cub. You think the Kains are interested in architecture for, what, its own sake? Even so, who will pay for it? Gotta think with your stomach some of the time. The Master is a shrewd man. Although, he did ban entrance to the Termitary… Of that, I wasn't a fan.
 What's going on with that?
 Folks there had problems with Fat Vlad, an' it almost turned violent. Makes sense, too! Five thousand animals are bound to turn into beasts. Your kind is like a pack of dogs, one howls an' the rest follow. But still…
 If I find out more, I'll be sure to tell you.
 "Pack of dogs"? Check a mirror. Your tongue's so loose it licks the ground.
 "Still is a step away from stiff." Isn't that one of your tiresome sayings?
 Let's see… Simon's dead, but you already knew that. The ground refused to accept your dad, you know that too. \nAn awful bachelor arrived from the Capital. Some odd girl arrived the same day as you, too. A curious one. Half sure she's some saint. Tore my soul out, hanged it out to dry…
 How did Simon die?
 What do you mean the ground "refused to accept" my dad?
 Who is this bachelor?
 Tell me more about the odd girl.
 …Wait. What about my father?
 No one knows. Felt feverish, I guess? \nYou notice he'd been joined at the hip with your dad? Glove an' hand. Always together, conspiring. Probably engineerin' a future for us stupid creatures.
 The Kains are still in charge, then?
 You even attend the funeral, Cub? Some familial bonds you have there. \nWhatever. Guess they managed without you. Burned him, since the ground wouldn't take the flesh. Your people weren't so pleased about that.
 Let's change the subject. What about the rest of town?
 Grabbed himself a nice slice of pie immediately. A learned man. A celebrity. Everyone's fighting tooth an' nail for the right to be scolded by him. The Kains even invited him to be their next door neighbor.
 The Kains are still in charge, then?
 Just something about her. You know me, I've got a keen intuition. Wouldn't have made it this far otherwise. I feel she's… not entirely human, even. The Saburovs took her in.
 Apart from the Saburovs, who else holds power now?
 Shouldn't you be at the cemetery? They've been tryin' to bury him since dawn. Tryin' an' failin'.
 Damn it! Why am I wasting my time with you, then?
 Checkin' out the wares?
 Nah. Just your smug mug.
 That familiar old face… You know, I remember what your esteemed father looked like… when he was young. I am, after all, only fifteen years younger. \nHe was a very decent person… He had a real spine.
 Boös Vlad. I'm honored.
 What do you want from me?
 What do you mean, "he was"? He's in still in town, right?
 Welcome home, my dear boy… welcome home. The reception was rather… lukewarm, though? Wasn't it?
 It was.
 It's fine. I expected this.
 Come, now… I don't want anything. You are the one with wants, and I suppose I'll learn them soon.
 Then why did you summon me?
 I'm just dropping by for old times' sake. I don't have anything better to do.
 I'm getting reports you're a villain, my boy… a murderous villain. My people are upset that they couldn't do you in. They're an ugly mob, aren't they? So small-minded. Animals… beasts… swine. At least you slipped away. \nPerhaps I should… stand up for you?
 That would be useful. Can you really?
 I don't need help. I've already dealt with the whole mess—well, partially.
 They are a mob, sure. But they're not swine.
 Now that's more like it! An independent lad… just like your father. He despised patronage too. Always by himself… wouldn't even take my advice. Wouldn't bow to anyone… \nShame. A supple backbone can be useful… It can improve the situation for everyone.
 What are you talking about?
 Do you know who killed him?
 You don't think they're beasts? Heh heh!
 You've treated this town's commonfolk like cattle for years. Do you expect me to just take your side?
 They aren't.
 There's a beast hidden in each of us. You too, boös.
 My power is immense, boy. Have you forgotten? Everything you see here is mine! The whole Bull Enterprise… the Abattoir, the Factory, the Warehouses, the Station… This town's veins are my reins. Its meat and bones, my throne! \nI am the Master… and I expect to be obeyed.
 You don't own me, boös.
 And everyone really obeys you?
 I haven't forgotten, boös, believe me. And I'm not the only one who remembers.
 Not you, that much I know. But we'll find out… soon enough. Soon enough.
 So why did you summon me?
 Are you running an investigation, then?
 He was… murdered. Tonight. My condolences… You didn't know?
 Murdered?! Who killed him?
 At least… take my advice. I'm always eager to help Isidor's son. \nStay here a while… Don't go out. My house is big, plenty of space. If you need anything, just call the servants.
 Why should I do that?
 Thanks. I'll consider it.
 No. I won't be caged.
 Like they have a choice! I pulled a few strings already. A word or two about you, my boy… and your esteemed father. The web is moving as we speak. \nThe servants pass the word to the higher-ups… and the higher-ups talk to the lower-downs… the lower-downs, they calm the mob. And the mob… the mob will eventually get its hands on your father's killer.
 Well. Thanks for believing me.
 Finding the killer is my responsibility now.
 For your future's sake, my boy. What's the rush? Take a rest… You've suffered so much. And the rest of the Town… will have a rest from you.
 Thank you, boös. I'll sleep when I'm dead.
 I'll take care of my future myself.
 Stop running around, my boy… No need for you to leave. I won't chain you up, but believe me… Out there, you'll just make a mess.
 Where's my father? I need… I need to see his body.
 Chain? You think you could lock me up?
 I could, my boy… I could easily.
 I'm on urgent business. I need to pay last respects to my father.
 What am I supposed to do, then? Sit on my hands?
 Well… he might have been put in the ground already. Your people never linger with the rites of death. They bury the deceased immediately… like a seed, yes? And if you take too long, a seed won't sprout.
 Where do they bury my people these days? In the new cemetery?
 That's true.
 Exactly, my boy… It will keep you alive.
 And meanwhile, my father is dead! Where is his body?
 There's no such thing as "your people" anymore. Yours, ours… We're all just people. What's passed is past, so we're all buried together. Your rites are still different, though… Your kind must be buried in the morning, yes?
 I need to go. Goodbye, boös.
 Yes.
 Father didn't think the past was in the past. And neither do I.
 Listen… are you planning to avenge your father?
 I need to find the murderer first.
 Why do you ask?
 Kain is eager to condemn someone. Saburov, to execute. I, however… I'll make sure we find the right person. Yes… the right one.
 The right one is the one who killed him. It's not that hard.
 This is my business, boös. Not yours.
 That's not your job.
 What the hell do you mean?
 You're a restless soul, Master Burakh. Or have you come around to my plan?
 I need to get into the Termitary.
 I'm not a calf to be corralled.
 What for… if I may ask?
 Personal reasons.
 There's a girl in there I want to meet.
 There's no need for you to visit the Termitary, my boy… no need at all. It's my domain… I know what I'm talking about.
 What's going on in there?
 Well, whatever.
 Do you, by any chance… mean Overseer Tycheek's daughter?
 Yes.
 No. I'm talking about a completely different girl.
 Small wonder. Tycheek's daughter is adored there… worshipped, even. Catered to, and taken care of… without you. She'll be fine. Worry not.
 And yet, I would like to have permission to enter.
 Thanks, boös. That's reassuring.
 Should I worry, though? What's going on in there?
 The rabble rebels, my boy… the rabble rebels. Working people are… easily roused. Quick to abandon their humanity, and turn into rabid beasts… for that's what they are. \nIt's fine, though… They'll come around. But as long as they're rowdy, I keep them locked tight. It will boil over… This is not the first time.
 They wouldn't rebel if they didn't have a reason to.
 Perhaps it's time you started paying them?
 Don't tell me how to run my business, my boy. I… like you. For now. Don't show me your teeth, and I won't have to show you mine.
 Yours are sharp, I know that.
 I don't work for you, boös.
 Got any idea where she keeps bread? The shelves are empty.
 Who are you?
 Hi, thief.
 A close friend or a bitter enemy. Your choice, really. So—friends?
 What do you want?
 No. There's a sinister look in your eyes.
 Do you believe in divination, Burakh?
 No, I don't.
 Of course. Can you see my future?
 Well, that makes things harder. Because you're going to do something awful, and I could have saved you the disgrace.\nBut I guess you'd rather stay gloomy, self-centered, and bull-headed… Am I right?
 …I'm going to disgrace myself?
 Picture perfect.
 You'll spill a ton of blood, Burakh. Tremendous amounts. A river of blood. Family blood. Beloved blood. You will drown this town in blood, and soon. Unless you trust me.
 So, a bite of toast and you'll wave your hands and fix everything? Or do you take coin?
 I don't understand.
 Listen to me. You need to leave town. Now. If you must stay—lay low, do nothing. The less you do, the less grief you'll bring to those around you. \nAbandon your schemes. I'll handle it on my own. It'll be glorious. You'll see.
 …What are you going to do?
 You're good at chin music, I'll give you that. But your actual words are bullshit.
 Whatever it takes. It's all going to hell, and soon… We're halfway there now. \nJust stay still. Trust me, will you? I'm your sister. Your double. And I know what must be done. I know a great deal, Burakh. The future is open to me.
 Prove it.
 Your life lessons will prove me right. But heed my words: Whenever you want to do something, don't. You'll just make it worse. You'll be the demise of your hometown. You'll drown it with blood.
 Not buying it. And I think you should get going. The mistress of the house is getting anxious.
 Listen up, because I'll only say this once. If I ever catch you here again, I might get angry. And if you cross me, it'll be your blood that begins this. How's that for prophecy?
 I'll think about it.
 Says a ripper.
 Sort of. I'm a surgeon.
 How am I a ripper?
 I have many faces. Perhaps this one is sinister, yes. But that's 'cause you're the villain. I'm only a mirror.
 I'm no hero, but I'm not a villain. Much less <i>the</i> villain.
 Well, what can I see in you, mirror, mirror on the wall?
 I can.
 Go ahead, then!
 It's simple, idiot. Whatever you wanted to do, don't. Drop your plans. You aren't bringing your father back. Saving lives is my business.
 No, it's mine. I'm a doctor.
 Fine. Let's go. I'll introduce you to this house's owner. She's convinced there's a rat running around.
 As am I. A better one than you.
 Are you going to leave or do I need to throw you out?
 Want to bet?
 Have you thought about what I told you?
 I had the strangest dream. Was it your doing?
 I'm not that fast a thinker.
 I did. My answer's no.
 No. Yours.
 Don't you want to know what I dreamed of?
 Ugh… What's wrong with me? It's just a bad dream.
 Of horror, I'm sure. All dreams are prophetic. And since <i>you</i> dreamed it, you must have seen yourself spill blood. As for the details, spare me. My nerves are delicate.
 I'm not some monster, myself… Are you sure it was prophetic?
 So you know how to hypnotize people, then?
 It was prophetic. No doubt about that.
 I'm a steppe man, and we believe in fate. You can't run from fate.
 Nothing's doubtless.
 So you say you have a gift, huh? Well, I do too. I can sense when I'm being lied to. Like right now.
 …Hypno-what? What does that mean? But I can do many things. It's not about what I can do, though: It's about what I'm telling you. Heed my warning, Burakh. Leave this place.\nYour dreams will grow lighter when you do. Or maybe go enlist. War could always use a person like you.
 My war is here.
 Maybe I will.
 You know why the earth won't take him?
 I'm all ears.
 Who?
 Begone, wraith. You're just an illusion.
 Your father. Earth expels him like a foreign body. See that girl, Grace? The caretaker? She's getting desperate. I think she'd take his place in the grave if she could.
 Do you even understand what you're rambling about, you awful creature?
 What? This girl's the caretaker?
 Some people are weavers. They make connections. Others are cutters. They rip things apart. \nYour father, he was a cutter. You Burakhs are permitted to, aren't you? You're important among the locals. Privileged. As a faithful surgeon, he would cut apart a living, breathing town. Or even tear it to shreds with his hands alone. A violent man.
 How do you even know? You've only been here a few days.
 I think you'd better shut your mouth now, or I'll be the one tearing you to shreds.
 But I do. Because I know people and I know how to listen to them. I know how to connect. But your father was a cutter. He demolished the whole mycelium.
 Mycelium? What does that have to do with anything?
 Leave my father out of this.
 A human mycelium. The mycelium of the Town. He believed it was all intergrown wrong. \nThat's just like you surgeons… If a fracture fuses wrong, you just break it again, and sever the tissue too! Who does that? I'd do it all differently.
 Go ahead then. It's not like I'm stopping you.
 So you're no surgeon, then?
 I'm not. I don't work with bones and meat. My expertise has to do with more delicate things. Souls. Feelings. You wouldn't understand.
 Right. How would I?
 I don't believe in the supernatural.
 Uh huh.
 So she's the one I need to speak to.
 I see. You were talking about my father?
 You know why walk all hunched? That's because you're carrying on your shoulders the burden of all the evils you are about to commit.
 And who might you be?
 
 Either your best friend or your worst enemy. Depends on you. So, friends?
 What do you want?
 No. I don't like you, girl. You have a sinister look in your eyes.
 Do you believe in fortune-telling, Burakh?
 No, I don't.
 Obviously. Can you read fortune?
 
 Ugh... That complicates things. 'Cause you're about to do something horrible, and I could have spared you the disgrace.\nYou must be a gloomy, self-absorbed, bull-headed man... amd I right?
 So what is the disgraceful thing that I'm about to do?
 Spot on. It's like you're reading my mind.
 You will spill a lot of blood, Burakh. An awful lot of it. A river of blood. Dear blood. Beloved blood. You will literally drown your hometown in blood, and soon. Unless you trust me.
 So... A cracker or two and you'll magically fix everything, right? Or do you accept coin?
 What is this supposed to mean?
 Enough. I get the gist. Let's assume we're well acquainted.
 Listen here. Leave the town right now. And if you insist on staying, just lay low and don't do anything. The less you do, the less grief you'll bring to the people around you. Abandon your plans. I'll do everything myself. It'll be great, you'll see.
 ...You'll do what?
 Well, you're good at making chin music, I'll grant you that. But what you're saying is bullshit.
 What it takes. It will all go to hell soon... it's on its way already. Just stay put. Trust me, 'kay? I'm your sister. Your counterpart. And I know what must be done. I know a lot, Burakh. The future is an open book to me.
 Prove it.
 Life will be my proof. Just remember: whenever you feel like doing something, don't. You will only make things worse. You will be the demise of your hometown. You will drown it in blood.
 Not convinced. And I think it's time you took your leave.
 So this is how it's going to be: if I see you again, I might just get angry. And if you get in my way, it'll be your blood that everything starts with. Seeing how it's been foretold and everything.
 I'll consider it.
 Says the ripper.
 Of a kind. I'm a surgeon.
 Ripper? How am I a ripper?
 I have a lot of looks. This one may be sinister, yes. That's 'cause you're the villain. I am but a mirror.
 I may not be the best person in the world, but I'm not a villain, much less THE villain.
 Well... So what say you, mirror mirror on the wall?
 I can.
 Shoot!
 It's supposed to mean this. Whatever you were planning to do, don't. Cancel your plans. You won't bring your father back. And saving lives is my business.
 No, it's mine. I'm a doctor.
 All right, whatever. Let's go, I'll introduce you to the owner of the house. She's been wondering if there was a rat upstairs.
 So am I. And a better one than you.
 
 Want to bet?
 Useless. Pointless. Smartass will be the end of him. So will you. Poor Patches…
 You can have a go at him too, if you like.
 Smartass?
 …Notkin wouldn't let me.
 I wonder why…
 Why, I wonder?
 The Bachelor. The learned goon. Self-absorbed, self-assured… and a total unbeliever. People like him do the most harm.
 Why are you even here?
 I just wanted to help.
 Why didn't you, then?
 They don't believe in me. They don't believe I'm a miracle worker… As they have believed, so shall it be done for them. But then why should the boy suffer?
 He shouldn't.
 I'll deal with him myself. Maybe something will come of it.
 I wouldn't trust you with my life, either.
 How about you just… don't? You'll only make it worse. Doctor Smartass would smother him with medicine. You… what'll you do, cut his heart out? Ripper…
 No. I have another idea.
 I'll do it my father's way. He could cure without cutting.
 I'd rather cut out yours. I'm curious about it.
 Your face seems vaguely familiar, but I'm positive we've never met before. What is your business?
 I'm the son of Isidor Burakh. My name is Artemy.
 I'm not here on business.
 You have my condolences. And my envy.
 Envy? Why?
 That, my good man, is hard to believe. Every resident of this town has some sort of business with me. It's what I do. The Bull Enterprise is more than just plants, warehouses, abattoirs, and freight stations—it's built of my esteemed father's ambitions. \nMy guess is that he somehow managed to step on your toes. Am I correct?
 No, it's my father who used to do business with your family. I, on the other hand, know very little about you.
 So you're Vlad Olgimsky's son.
 You were lucky to have a father like him.
 Indeed.
 You think so?
 And who might your father be?
 Isidor Burakh.
 Not only that, but I'm a "Vlad Olgimsky" in my own right. And who do I have the pleasure of talking to?
 I'm Artemy Burakh.
 Isidor respected you as a person. He indulged your desire to walk your own path, and has never forced you to follow in his footsteps. Never tried to produce a carbon copy of himself.
 How can you know that?
 That bit about my "own path"? I'm afraid it's not so simple.
 When he sent you away, the Kin were livid. They condemned Isidor for tearing you away from your roots. \nBut he always said that this was the only way for you to come to truly love your people—through choice, not blind necessity. I see great love and wisdom in that.
 You seem to be well-informed.
 I get the feeling you're venting about your life, not discussing mine.
 My position in the family forces me to keep tabs on everything that happens in our sad little town.
 You don't seem to happy with that.
 Right you are. Familial obligation is a sore spot for me. I'd pay good money to never have to think about it again.
 I can relate.
 To me, it's a very important principle.
 With a father like yours, I don't see how you could say otherwise.
 Your father is the most influential person in the Town.
 If we disregard the Kains and Saburovs, one could say my father controls this town as closely as he controls his fat, fat purse. Sadly, he's content with the current state of affairs, and sees no reason for things to change. His complacency will doom us all. \nThings are already in motion… but let us speak of something else.
 All right.
 You're right, though. The current power balance should be challenged. I'm saying this as a son of the Kin.
 Fancy a drink?
 To avoid any miscommunication here, I'll be blunt. It was a small secret of ours. If my father finds out… Let's just say I'll be in trouble.\nI guess this cellar is now yours by inheritance, isn't it?
 Obviously.
 Answer the question, please.
 My dear Artemy… I appreciate that you're a straightforward man, so I'll be honest with you. \nYour people—or rather, what's left of them—that whole community called "the Kin"? They all but <i>belong</i> to my family. To my father, the Kin are a commodity: the workforce for the Bull Enterprise.
 Father told me it's more like slavery.
 Yes, and it's no laughing matter.
 Oh, I quite agree. Well, you should know that I don't condone my esteemed father's methods. And I <i>will</i> rule the Bull Enterprise one day.\nAs an insightful and assiduous owner, I would like to create a more productive and efficient foundation for our industrial empire. Do you understand?
 Not quite.
 I do.
 I would like to revive the Kin and its… dignity. I'm fond of your traditions. They are unusual… Almost miraculous. I don't believe in mysticism, but one has to accept the obvious facts. \nSo I chose to give your father an opportunity to study some of them.
 So you're a philanthropist, huh?
 And what exactly was he doing there?
 No, I'm a selfish man, acting entirely in his own interest. Slave labor is inefficient, for one. The Kin are dying out under these unbearable work conditions. \nI don't want to be the owner of a ruined and broken… well, <i>asset,</i> robbed of any will to flourish. Pardon my cynicism.
 I like you, Vlad.
 You sound insincere.
 There is some sort of… contraption in the facility. What is it?
 I can't say for sure. I've been to the place a few times, but never had an opportunity to scrutinize your father's work. I think he was combining… unusual ingredients. Making organic mixtures of some sort. He had a fascinating theory about natural elements, and how they intertwine… a universal synthesis hypothesis.
 Yeah… You mean the Lines.
 Do you know how the contraption works?
 No, he assembled it himself… and I doubt he explained how it works to anyone. I guess you'll have to figure that out on your own.\nAnd remember what I told about before—be discreet. I would hate it if anyone found out about the place. Do I have your word?
 My word binds. I won't risk breaking it.
 Yes.
 There is an urchin who knows about the place already. But I'll take care of him.
 Please do.
 Deal.
 …If I ever see him again.
 …How long has it been? Seven years?
 Less. It's been five years since I left.
 Seven? Maybe. You always were better with numbers.
 You've changed, Lara. Grown. Your eyes look so cold.
 Feels like ten.
 Why are you giving me that look?
 You know I have a heart condition. And the air here is thick.
 Why are you giving me that look?
 You smell like blood.
 Ah, that's… nothing.
 Everyone does. Trust me, I'm a surgeon.
 We share the same pain, now. Siblings in suffering. That's why you've come to see me, isn't it?
 What are you talking about?
 We dearly loved our fathers. Now they're both gone. Yours, killed this morning. Mine, this past spring, after the Battle at the Fords. Many terrible things happened… while you were away.
 I'm sorry. I didn't know your father well… but I always respected him. He must have been killed in action, then?
 This morning… Lara, what are you saying?
 Yes. He was killed. Do you know anything about it?
 Oh. You don't know…
 Speak.
 Forget it. I don't want to talk about it. Why are you back?
 Father sent me a letter… two weeks ago, now. A disturbing letter, where he wrote about his involvement in something dangerous.
 I think I have to figure that out, still. Will you help me, Lara? Are we still friends?
 I think I now know why. To take my father's place.
 He was murdered at dawn. At your home. No one knows who the culprit was. \nThe common crowd blames it on a shabnak—yes, the steppe monster. Others claim some woman killed him. Others still, they swear it was an outsider, a huge man in bloody clothes… like you.
 You don't suspect me, do you?
 And what will you do now?
 I'll find the killer, of course.
 I don't know.
 I'll demand justice. I'll surrender myself to the authorities, explain everything… Who's in charge now?
 You know what? You aren't going anywhere—I won't let you. Take a look at yourself. You can barely stand, let alone run around chasing some assailant.\nYou're staying. Eat something, then get some sleep. When you wake up, we'll figure out the rest. How's that?
 Fair enough. I'm on my last legs…
 I took a beating, Lara. That's why I'm swaying…
 Thank you. I wouldn't mind a bite or two.
 Just take whatever you need. There must be something in the cabinet in the hall.
 Should I sleep upstairs? That's where the guest rooms used to be, anyway… when we were kids.
 You won't even set a table for me? No bread, no salt? No hospitality…
 No. Don't go upstairs. It's all locked.\nEver since Father died, I don't go up there. Use this bed, instead.
 …Lara, what's wrong? Why won't you look at me?
 Whatever. If you're unhappy to see me, say so.
 …You know where things are. My home is your home. Make yourself comfortable.
 …Lara, what's wrong? Why won't you look at me?
 You know, I think I should leave. Time is of the essence.
 Don't, not now. Go and eat! You know it's September, don't you? Do you even remember what autumn is like here?\nYou must eat, even if portions are small, or else you'll become feeble. Your father taught us this!
 I know, I know…
 Don't mention Father. Please, not now.
 Must I remind you that you need more sleep than usual?\nIt's September! The steppe cools, the twyre blooms. Have you forgotten? When did you last sleep?
 You're right. I haven't slept in a while. Although, I did take a nap while I traveled.
 Stop shouting. I know more about the steppe and twyre than you do, all right?
 Can't you spare an hour, or five? Yes, time is precious. So what!\nThe worst is over. Are you afraid things might worsen still? They won't. Your father's killer won't flee… Until the next train, at least.
 True… I should eat. Get some sleep. In that order.
 I'm not afraid of anything.
 Thank you, Lara… Although, I can't shake the feeling something's not right.
 It's not like you have anywhere else to go. You're that fugitive people are after, aren't you?
 Seems so.
 Not me, no.
 While you're asleep, I'll go on a walk, test the waters. Perhaps I'll learn something, or better yet, make them see they might be hunting the wrong person.
 Sounds wonderful. Thank you, Lara.
 Might be? So you believe it, too? I never expected this from you, of all people.
 Just be careful. People are wild out there.
 …Wake up, Cub! There's someone upstairs! A thief must have gotten in. Or someone even worse…?
 You don't have much to steal.
 "Cub"? So, Gravel… You've remembered our old friendship.
 Ugh, what a dream I had. Twyre is indeed in full bloom.
 Something's fumbling around, I hear it. What if it's… the thing? The thing that killed Isidor?\nWhat if the soil spit out a shabnak after all?
 Don't be silly. Even I don't believe those tales—it's unbecoming of you, all right?
 I'll look around. Just stay calm.
 Well, I hope so. Is there a weapon I can borrow?
 Of course not. Maybe a knife in the kitchen, I guess.
 Forget it. I'll get by on strength, if needed.
 It'll have to do.
 You're the one acting silly! You've forgotten everything. Don't you remember those bones we found strung together? Isidor himself told us those were shabnak remains.
 He was just trying to scare us.
 Drink some water and calm down. Even if a shabnak did come into town, it wouldn't climb up a building.
 Well?
 I'll check in a minute. I need to collect my thoughts… Still troubled by the dream I had…
 Wait a minute. I need to think.
 Things still look bad for you, Cub… but I managed to help a little.
 What'd you do?
 What looks bad?
 It makes me feel all warm and fuzzy to be Cub again. I missed you, Lara.
 People's brains have turned to mush. Some insist you killed Simon. Others, that… you killed Isidor.\nThe rest believe it was a shabnak who stole your shape, so they punish random women, any women they find.
 Ah, sweet home. Clarity of mind, sound logic—that's why I love my fellow countrymen.
 What? People think I killed my own father?
 But I only arrived at dawn! Got stabbed at once. I didn't even make it off the train!
 They don't care. They don't think, Cub! Blame September. They're all steppe-headed. Twyre-ridden.
 "Steppe, endless steppe, the way lies far before us…"
 All right. What must I do, then?
 They'll come to their senses soon. You know how mobs work. I explained, to the right folks, you had nothing to do with Isidor's death. Women, mostly. They'll spread the news quick. Here in the Flank, at least. In the Chine, in Backbone… you'll be safer.
 They'll come to their senses. But I'll forever be suspected of patricide.
 Thank you, Lara. I'll never forget this. Now I just need to find Stakh…
 That's up to you, Cub.
 Is it?
 As usual…
 You were gone for… six years? You're an outsider now, and you came back on the wrong side. Maybe you didn't kill Isidor, but you killed someone, right?\nI didn't even need to see the blood. Your butcher's eyes told me everything… That thousand-yard stare.
 Five years, not six. Closer this time, though.
 Butchers aren't monsters. They're workers.
 It was kill or be killed. You'd rather see me dead?
 Go ahead. But don't act surprised if you're unwelcome.
 How come?
 I'm not fragile. I'll manage.
 His dedication to Isidor… Few sons are as loyal to their fathers. He's grown cold toward you, the one who abandoned his mentor.\nPerhaps he thought he could replace you as Isidor's heir. Now… I bet he'll lose his mind. All in all, don't expect kindness from him.
 I've done nothing wrong.
 Do you also think I'm a monster?
 You'll have to start over, Cub. Although… maybe not entirely. The Kin must be eager to see you.\nWith Isidor gone, someone has to take his place. Not just for your steppe people, but for us all.
 I know.
 Thank you, Gravel. For everything.
 That's how you see me? "Your steppe people" and "us"? I shouldn't have come back at all.
 So what was it?
 Nothing. You must have imagined it.
 Some… beggar, I think, broke into your house. She's babbling nonsense. Should I toss her out?
 Well, she's not a shabnak. Don't worry. She'll leave soon.
 Why did you go upstairs? I told you, there's nothing to see there.
 You have a guest.
 Who's the girl upstairs?
 Just felt nostalgic, is all.
 No one's there! Everything's locked up. Get some sleep this instant. Your hallucinations scare me.
 You're right. I need sleep.
 Some creepy brat's up there, just grinning! Said a bunch of nasty things to me.
 Burakh, to bed! Now! You're seeing nonexistent girls! Give it half an hour, and you'll imagine even scarier monsters. Have some pity on my nerves! Go to bed!
 Fine. I'm not one to pry into the secrets of others.
 Autumn air, twyre in bloom… Understood. Goodnight.
 Don't. If she's already here, let her be. Maybe she's hiding from the violent mob. I'll check on her later, provide some care, if needed.
 She's not so gentle. More likely, you'll need that care.
 She could use that.
 So, here we are again… I managed to calm down Stakh. He was wrong about you. Or… he was not entirely right, at least.
 But still right, huh?
 What got into him?
 Were you already offered your father's inheritance, Cub? Refuse it, I beg you! Do not follow his path.
 Why would I refuse?
 You're too late. I've already accepted what I must do.
 …Inheritance?
 I don't know if I can properly explain this… There is no happiness down this path, not for yourself or others. Your father's path was cruel, Cub.
 Explain yourself.
 My father? Cruel?
 All in all, this is a quiet town. Not perfect, but there's a place for everyone. We're all connected through bonds of love, of friendship, of patience.\nLife flows through those bonds, the Town's veins, and to cut them would cause harm. Your father… don't be mad… he dreamed of remaking it all.
 I'm sure he had his reasons.
 You're being awfully poetic about this.
 What exactly did he want to change?
 Everything. Our town felt wrong to him.\nHe used to say that broken bones set badly will cripple a man, leaving him unable to function as others do. To Isidor, our town was a vile malunion.
 Perhaps he thought that for a reason.
 I'm not too fond of our town, either, after that welcome I received.
 He <i>was</i> a healer, sure. He knew life as no one else could. The Kin revered him. But even that did us more harm than good, in the end.
 What do you mean?
 Five years ago, there was an outbreak in the Crude Sprawl. It spread like wildfire—dozens and dozens dead. People sent for Isidor.\nWhen he arrived, he… he ordered the whole quarter to be quarantined. No one could leave, not even the healthy people trapped inside.
 It was the right decision.
 That's terrible, but I'd make the same call in his shoes.
 Impossible!
 The townsfolk obeyed his orders without question. They barricaded the whole neighborhood. In the end, there were almost no survivors.
 But the Town lived on.
 I suppose that is true. But Cub… do not take his inheritance. Isidor's inheritance is his power, his authority, his duties. If you become another Isidor, we will never rest, we will never know peace.
 There's no rest for the wicked.
 Peace only lasts until the next war.
 I see what you mean, dear Gravel. I will think about it.
 As Stakh would explain this, Isidor's inheritance involves more than material possessions—it's a legacy. Accepting his legacy would mean taking his place among the Kin. They expect that of you.
 What's so bad about following in my father's footsteps?
 He was a kind man, but his deeds were… ruthless.
 What do you mean?
 A surgeon can't avoid spilling blood.
 You should let him speak for himself.
 I want to talk to you first. He can wait.
 I already did. If you ask me, the man's losing his marbles.
 <i>"A sad pup there was laying,\nAnd a kitten dismaying,\nJust a couple of pitiless creatures…"</i>\n…I don't remember the rest. Do you?
 Yeah. You're singing it wrong. It's "a couple of pitiful creatures," not "pitiless."
 No, I don't. Where's the caretaker?
 I'm the caretaker. Now, anyway… Why are you giving me that look? My father is. Was. He died three years ago.
 Seems like the whole Town's orphaned.
 Aren't you a little too young for this job?
 I'm singing it right.
 Who are you, kid?
 Why are you so sad?
 It's so cruel that people can't rest in peace, even after death. Whose sins are we punished for? Why does the soil push out Old Burakh?
 …What?
 I've heard it's because he was a surgeon, that he cut things apart instead of joining them. How foolish…
 I'm young, yes. But no one else can speak with the dead, can they?
 I'm Artemy Burakh, kid. I came here to give my father a proper burial.
 You can speak to the dead?
 Yes. They need consolation. Earth cradles them, but it can't ease their pain.
 I think you're the one who needs consolation.
 They tried to bury him twice already. But the Earth won't take him… It pushes the body upwards.\nThat means he's got something left undone in the world. Owes a debt… He was a man of obligation.
 What debt?
 "Pushes upwards"? What the hell does that mean?
 He was buried deep. But when your people returned with the seeds and the milk, per the rite, they saw his body lying in the open again. \nEarth pushed him out. Father said a similar thing happened before, when they buried Chief Urehlin. But he was a really bad person… Not like Old Burakh at all!
 I can't believe what I'm hearing. How is that possible?
 Are you out of your mind, kid?
 I don't know. It's just… he carried too heavy a burden. He failed to do something important… because his life was cut short. Your people say that if the ground doesn't take him, they'll burn him, as the old rite demands. But it's horrible!
 All right. Stay here. No need to follow me.
 Cremation isn't a crime. If things are the way you say, at least it's better than that… outrage!
 It is a crime! The dead mustn't be burned! Earth doesn't destroy; it preserves! It dissolves them and saves them for future harvests! \nEarth is alive here! If you burn people, how will they speak? How will they bloom? How will they return? Do you have <i>any</i> idea what you're talking about?
 Calm down! You're hysterical!
 If one mustn't burn the dead, but digging is also frowned upon... then what options do we have?
 You don't believe me? I wanted to take his duty upon myself, and even said the vow… but nothing happened. They just looked at me as though I'm crazy.\nIt's because I'm not a steppe person. I don't really understand all of it.
 What vow?
 Why did you come? You aren't allowed to be here now.
 All right. Sorry. I'm leaving.
 Is it true you spoke to my father today?
 I've heard that you… Ah, whatever. It's bullshit anyway.
 No, I didn't…
 Grace. That's what they call you, right? Look at me.
 That's what I thought. Goodnight.
 Someone saw you talk to my father.
 All right, fine… It's true. The dead need to be spoken with. Otherwise they're in too much pain.
 Do they answer?
 Sometimes. When they do, I feel pain too.
 A girl told me it kills you slowly. Is that true?
 Clara, right? But… she praised me. Said I'm doing the right thing by consoling the dead. She's a very kind girl, though there are those who hate her, for some reason.
 Can you help me talk to my father?
 Does it kill you or does it not?
 I don't know… I'd need to ask him. I've never done that before.
 Don't. Let's not waste your life on trivialities.
 What did he tell you today?
 Please do.
 It hurts me. Clara said I only have enough strength for three or four more conversations. After that, I may die.
 I see. I'll leave you be, then.
 What did my father say to you?
 Three or four? Okay. We'll have to strategize about how best to use your ability, then.
 He said that it hurts. That he never expected it, that it was strange… As if a friend had killed him. He's very sad he didn't get to see you. \nBut he also said nothing would have changed even if you'd gotten here on time.
 Something <i>would</i> have changed: He'd still be alive.
 A friend, huh? Interesting…
 Go on, then: Ask him. How do you do it, I wonder? I need to talk to him.
 I need rest… Can you come back later, please? I don't feel so well right now…
 Of course. Goodbye.
 Let me talk to my father, and I'll leave after.
 You hit hard for a hunchback! But whoa, boy, you screwed up! Those three guys are dead. I saw you do it, too. You're gonna be in serious trouble!
 A hunchback…? Kid, I'm bent over in pain here!
 What kind of doggy are you?
 Shut up, mongrel. Won't take much work for me to add a fourth to the pile.
 You need to handle that bleeding, old man. You're covered in blood. Your own blood!
 I know that.
 You don't need to lecture me, boy. I'm a surgeon.
 I'm a watchdog, and I watch out for your soul. No, wait, I'm a guide dog. I'm gonna guide your soul to its rightful place when you die.
 <i>My</i> soul? These poor fools need your help first.
 I'll definitely die if I don't stop this bleeding. If only I had a bandage…
 Here you go. A tourniquet! It used to be my leash, but… seems like you need it more.
 Thanks. You're a nice kid.
 A leash? No thanks. I'd rather avoid leashes.
 Or do you want my collar? You could fix your leg with it.
 Actually… sure. Hand it over. An underdog can't throw help away.
 I'll manage.
 Man, you really have some anger problems, don't you? Zing! Pow! Blam! Three guys dead! This ain't the right way. Ain't how we do things around here.
 Yeah? What's the right way, then?
 Kid, "around here" isn't anywhere special.
 I'll handle it. It's my sin to carry—I don't need a lecture.
 Oh, I saw that. You're sure good at cutting people. All reflexes. A slicer-dicer!
 Yes, I am good at cutting people.
 Do you have anything I can use to stop this bleeding?
 Well, you gotta be nicer! Just hit 'em—three times, max. Send 'em running, and let 'em run! You don't actually have to kill everyone who bothers you! Jeez!
 I'll… keep that in mind.
 It's safer my way.
 But this town <i>is</i> special. I mean, the <i>folks</i> are ordinary. But the Town…
 I know. I was born here.
 Well, if everyone here is like you… then maybe you're right.
 Oh, man, you're gonna get in trouble! The two guys that got away are gonna stir up the whole Town. Every dog has its day! They'll make you apologize for sure. On your back. In the dirt.
 I didn't have a choice!
 I won't apologize to anyone. I acted in self-defense.
 Look at you—feeling better! But the Town's not too welcoming, is it? \nDon't worry. The steppe is wide. It can hide anyone. What brings you here?
 Who are you, kid?
 I didn't come here to hide.
 I <i>am</i> feeling better. Thanks for helping me back there.
 Why do you ask?
 Are you here alone?
 Tell me straight—were you the one who poisoned the dogs?
 Nope. All quiet. Only three of us here—you and me and two best friends.
 …Was it you then, buddy?
 We're not friends, kid. So there's only two of us here. Which means you're on your own.
 As you wish! Can't hide from yourself, anyway. That's what they say.
 They also say that you're a pathetic little punk.
 But there's a criminal doing just that, hiding around here somewhere. Have you seen him?
 All lies! I'm a good, kind soul.
 So it's true… Honestly, I'm surprised.
 Explain yourself.
 No, the steppe has a hundred eyes. It sees everything, it remembers everything. Leave me be, killer-man. I might end up being useful to you.
 The steppe won't help you. It doesn't need murderous whelps.
 Why did you do it, you little punk? Why did you kill the dogs?
 You're welcome. I'd tell you, "scratch my back and I'll scratch yours," but I'm not the type to demand back-scratching back. So what do you want? Need another wound dressed?
 I'm looking for the punk who poisoned the boys' dogs. Know where he is?
 Who are you, kid?
 The Soul-and-a-Halves are the real punks, and Notkin is the worst. And punks deserve to suffer, right?\nBut you can't hurt them. They just wipe the blood away and keep going. So you need to hit them where it <i>does</i> hurt. Right in the heart. Make them see how it feels!
 "Hit them where it hurts," huh? I think they were right. This world doesn't need people like you.
 Hold this leash for a second, will you?
 You're disgusting. Scram.
 No, no, spare me! We're friends! I helped you out, didn't I? You owe me!\nDoesn't that mean anything to you? Let me go. Maybe I could be useful to you!
 I also owe it to the boys to do the right thing. So here, have this: a gift from them.
 I do respect my debts. Hopefully this one counts even if I let you go.
 Get lost… As if I would foul my hands with your blood!
 Wonderful! So off you go.\nBy the way, if you need anyone to confirm that you only arrived <i>this morning,</i> and couldn't have murdered anyone last night, just say the word. I'll run to Saburov and testify.
 I don't need anything from you. Get lost!
 Yes… That would be useful, actually. Wait for me by the Town Hall.
 Saburov…?
 Our bloodsucking governor. He's been sitting on his hands for five years, so now they're itching to strangle someone. He calls it "justice." \nBut… he'll take witness testimony. He's a bloodsucker, but he's a bloodsucker with a code. Wanna head over there?
 Fine. Wait for me by the Town Hall. I'll be there.
 I'll manage just fine without you. I don't need help from scumbags.
 First, stay! Then, play!
 So they didn't hurt you after all?
 …Are you okay? Something seems off.
 So you got your just deserts, huh?
 You friend? Outsiders, beware!
 No, we're not friends.
 How am I an outsider? I'm a local. And we've met!
 Don't touch. Bad boy! Bad boy!
 You gotta actually woof to make the joke work. What a stupid prank.
 No, you're a good boy! Keep up the good work.
 The one with the knife was Kirik. A leatherworker. Not gonna cry for him—that guy was nuts.
 Was this an ambush? How long were they waiting for me?
 And who were the others?
 They weren't waiting for you. I think <i>you</i> were an accident.
 Then who was the real target?
 An "accident"? Is this kind of accident common around here?
 Hell if I know. Cannery workers. You can tell by their hands.
 You've got a sharp eye.
 Moonlighting as highwaymen? Does the cannery underpay them?
 Four eyes! Ain't no joke.
 Look, I just want to know why they jumped me.
 I dunno. Rumor's going around that someone else got murdered tonight. Guess I should sniff around and find out… Who knows? Maybe it's true.
 Good boy.
 I hope it isn't. This town's seen enough blood for one day.
 Sometimes. But things usually go smoothly, and everyone meets the fate they were destined for. Every bullet finds its billet!
 Every bullet finds its billet indeed.
 I'm not a big believer in fate.
 So why did they jump me, then?
 Go away. I saw everything. No one saw me. But I did.
 What did you see?
 Why do you want me to go away?
 What do they call you, kiddo?
 Everything.
 Did you see the fight?
 Did you see me get off the train?
 I don't.
 Did you see the fight?
 Did you see me get off the train?
 I'm not a kiddo. And no one calls me.
 Did you see the fight?
 Did you see me get off the train?
 What is there about you to love? Nothing. So I don't.
 That's all right. You don't have to love me.
 Perhaps there is something.
 The important thing is, you saw me arrive at dawn. Right?
 I don't need you. Nuh-uh. Things were great without you. Great.
 I need <i>you,</i> though. So don't go anywhere, all right?
 Okay… maybe we will become friends. When you get a little older.
 Honestly, I don't need you, either. You're not very friendly.
 Grace.
 Why?
 A cemetery is no place for lonely girls.
 She's killing herself. Grace is. She doesn't care.
 Killing herself…?
 Being scared.
 What are you scared of?
 She talks to the dead for real. Touches them with her head. But it kills the living. I'm telling her, that's not how it's done! But she won't listen…
 And how is it done? Like there's a different way...
 Touches them with her head? What?
 There is another way. I can show you. Come on. Just walk with smaller steps.
 Wait a second. I want to check on Grace first.
 All right, let's go.
 Yes. Touches them with her head.
 I'd like to see <i>that…</i>
 And that's killing her?
 Tell her not to do it! Tell her she's doing it wrong! Tell her I know how to do it right.
 Do you?
 Yes. Clara says Grace will die completely if she does it three more times.
 But you know a different way, huh?
 Clara who?
 My new friend. She also said my way is better.
 What way?
 …
 What are you doing here?
 Why are you so gloomy?
 Why did you come here? I don't need you. Nobody here needs you. We're not friends with her anymore, anyway.
 No longer friends with whom?
 What are you doing here?
 So?
 Relax. She's sleeping now.
 You said you'd show me how to talk to the dead.
 She's probably dead.
 Nope. She's just as alive as you or I.
 You said you'd show me how to talk to the dead.
 Yes. I know a different way.
 Let's go, then.
 Just go slow. I've got short legs. And I can't run.
 I'll carry you on my back. Hop on.
 Why can't you run?
 It's not polite.
 Not polite?
 Yes. It makes the Earth mad. It's alive, after all.
 Well, that all makes sense now. Let me carry you.
 Fine. We'll walk slowly.
 It'll manage. Earth and I are old pals.
 So do you want to know how to do it right? How to talk to the people in the ground?
 Yes.
 Are you for real? Can you really do that?
 You're here. Good. The trial can begin.
 Go on.
 But who is the accused, kids? Shouldn't you at least present them to me?
 Who are you anyway, runt?
 A question first: They say you're no son to Old Burakh.\nHe was a doctor. He saved lives. It is said that you kill instead. Is that true?
 Ah. So <i>that's</i> who the accused is.
 I am a Burakh. Have no doubt.
 Is what true? That this town is full of gossips and rumormongers? Yeah, it surely is.
 Answer the question, please. Are you a murderer or no?
 I… may have killed, yes.
 No. And listening to idle chatter does you no good.
 Killing is not necessarily murder.
 Calm down. No need to get defensive. Or are you uncomfortable doing this in front of my Soul-and-a-Halves?
 Aren't you cheeky, boy.
 Don't "calm down" me, boy. You want to put me on trial? Go on, then.
 Tell me: Is it right to kill? We need to know what you believe. Old Burakh wasn't just a doctor to us. He was a teacher. He knew how to live.\nYou say you are his son, so you're to take his place and answer: Is murder acceptable?
 It's right to kill someone who preys on the weak and defenseless; to take revenge against those who deserve it.
 Only in self-defense.
 Only to protect a loved one.
 No. Killing is never right. Never forget that.
 Cheeky or not, this isn't a game. We're talking about something important here.
 I'm all ears.
 Then stop trying to get under my skin, boy. Consider how they paint me as a dangerous man…
 Notkin. <i>Chief</i> Notkin 'round here. But the real question is: who are <i>you?</i>
 I am Artemy Burakh. Son of Isidor.
 What's with the frown? …You're thinking about your father, aren't you?
 Yes. I am.
 I'm done with this interrogation, boy. Stop wasting my time.
 So murder <i>can</i> be right sometimes?
 Looks like it.
 Who are you planning on killing, boy?
 But do you plan to avenge your father?
 Of course. If I can find the culprit…
 We're talking about you, children, not about me.
 …Perhaps I won't.
 Good. We now know the kind of man you are. Here ends the trial. You're free to go.
 So you know me, huh? That was quick. Guess I should talk to you if I'm ever confused.
 …I don't get it.
 It's not about <i>me,</i> but about <i>us.</i> My Soul-and-a-Halves always hang together. \nAnswer the question. Take your time if you need to. You may very well be choosing our fate.
 Fine. Yes, sometimes killing is acceptable.
 No. Murder is never acceptable.
 You're so tall… Think you can beat me at wrestling?
 Bad idea.
 Don't want to hurt you, boy.
 What? You have your revenge and so do we. We now know how to deal with Lika, and that verdict can't be appealed. \nAll you and I have in common now is that today will end soon. Go. Thanks for your help.
 Don't tell me what to do. I can figure out my own schedule.
 Just don't get carried away, tough guy.
 Wait a second. What did this Lika do, anyway?
 So, is revenge bad too?
 Do as I say, not as I do.
 Revenge is inevitable, boy. I'm already plotting mine.
 Yes. Life finds its own way of punishing the wicked.
 Lika poisoned our friends, who were weak and defenseless. It's an open and shut case.
 You mean the dogs?
 We are Soul-and-a-Halves. To us, they were not mere dogs, but friends. And we prefer them to people.
 Agreed. So…?
 Why do they call you "Soul-and-a-Halves"?
 We each have a Half, besides our own soul. See this gray cat here, chasing his own tail? That's Jester. We're always together.
 I see no cat, though.
 Cut to the chase. You're planning to kill this Lika?
 Of course you don't. He's <i>my</i> Half. Jester will only show himself to you when I trust you.
 So, about this Lika…
 The Gumstone! Steppeward from the Basket! Aren't you supposed to know all this? Or do you steppe folk have different names for everything?
 Nah, it's the same. I know the place.
 Ah, yeah… The steppe people call it Uur Heelu: "Hatred." See you around, pups.
 What matters is where he fled to. And that, we know.
 So he won't escape reckoning. Good.
 And where would that be?
 Why do you care?
 Listen, kids. I'll handle this.
 I'm just looking for a good place to hide.
 Where did that come from? He's our problem, not yours. You've done your part; we'll do the rest.
 You'll put him on guard. I, however, can get the drop on him.
 You're scaring me. I'm starting to suspect you're not joking.
 Why the jitters, old man? You looked tougher when you told us that murder is righteous.\nOn your way, Burakh the Younger. We'll work this one out ourselves.
 You'll regret it.
 So long then, "chief."
 …We have a deal. Murky says it's by the Gumstone.
 Where's that?
 Ah, I know the place. The lad knows his hideouts.
 Who's Murky?
 Wow, is that so? This changes things.
 How come?
 So, you say murder is bad. But it's easy for you to say. You've gave Wolfling a bone. Never fed Duke. Never met Lika. I'd like to see if you'd change your tune when you actually encountered the traitor. \nI bet my soul you'd lose it and snap his neck.
 What are you saying…?
 You really oughta take better care of that soul.
 It's fine; I've a Half on top of it, after all.
 You have what?
 Here's the deal. You're so full of the milk of human kindness, go and meet Lika for yourself. And if you truly, honestly believe a lying, cheating lowlife like him deserves to go free: Let him go free.\nBut if you figure he needs to be taught a lesson… Give him this leash. It'll bring him back here, guaranteed.
 Are you testing me?
 Is this like a "black mark" of sorts?
 And then what? You'll kill him?
 Kind of.
 No deal, then. I don't do "tests."
 All right. Deal.
 No. It's a leash. He'll know what it means. You won't.
 Find yourself a better-informed hitman, then.
 All right, I'll take it.
 Of course not. Didn't you teach us that murder is never right? But we <i>will</i> send him six feet under.
 I don't like the sound of this. No deal.
 I'll hold you to it.
 The girl in the corner. She was the one who told us you're a killer.
 Did she see me, then?
 So, what's that stone you were talking about…?
 Perhaps you could. And then what?
 If he's as bad as you say, I'll drag him over here.
 And then I snap his neck like a twig.
 I'll give him a spanking, I suppose.
 I'll figure it out when I get there.
 You know what? Give him this leash. He'll understand what it means. Will you do this for us?
 Sure.
 A leash? Why?
 Well, he's untrained, so just giving a command won't do. But this leash will do the trick. Just give it to him. Deal?
 Sure. I'm intrigued, even.
 What nonsense. I won't do it.
 She did. But don't bother her. She's frightened as it is.
 Fine. Where do I go?
 Stay here, then. This is sanctuary. No grown-up would dare enter.
 Got it. I appreciate the hospitality.
 …So, would you like me to deal with your poisoner?
 We each have a Half besides our own soul. See this gray cat here, chasing his own tail? That's Jester. We're always together.
 I see no cat, though.
 Ah, I see. So the pet is like the third half of your soul?
 Of course you don't. He's <i>my</i> Half. Jester will only show himself to you when I trust you.
 I see. So no one here trusts me quite yet…
 Indeed.
 Back to business, though. Why did you mention revenge at all?
 Jester thinks you're a decent sort, and he's not the only one. So, behold: We solemnly grant you this leash.\nIt means you're always welcome here. And that you may even get your own Half, one day. Not everyone does.
 What Jester?
 What did you do to the boy?
 Don't go singing my praises just yet. I let your poisoner go.
 A "half"?
 We didn't kill him, as you can see.
 Good. So instead, you…?
 I'm not so sure…
 My Half. My cat. Called "Jester" because he can rope-walk, stand on his forepaws, and eat raw potatoes.
 Cool.
 Can I see him?
 So what have you done to Lika?
 Not yet. He'll show himself to you when we know you're a good man.
 I look forward to it.
 Hope springs eternal.
 So what did you do to the boy?
 He took a trip underground. Deep.
 Folk don't dig pits in the Town. This I know; has something changed?
 You mean six feet deep, don't you?
 "Underground"?! What have you <i>done,</i> punks? Do you… do you even know something, <i>anything</i> about the ground here?
 Nothing has changed. But there is at least one pit.
 Has someone gone mad…? Where is it?
 Come on, are you serious? Those are old wives' tales…
 You fools! These are not tales!
 Where is it? Where is the pit?
 Deeper than that.
 Digging wells is forbidden in the Town. So stop trying to fool me.
 …I can't say. I gave my word.
 Whoever dug it will be <i>very</i> sorry.
 Fair enough. I won't make you snitch. But I'll find the culprit myself.
 …You let him go?
 I let him go.
 If I am to replace my father: Here ends your first lesson.
 …This changes nothing. Keep the leash. But for now, go; I need to think.
 You do that. It'll do you good.
 You'll understand why one day, boy.
 Half a soul more. A rook, a dog, or maybe a cat… though probably you'd get something huge. A bear, or a bull. We've never had a Half like that before.
 What did you do to the boy?
 I let Lika go.
 Perhaps you'll tame your own dragon when you grow up.
 Now, look. See Murky? There she broods. She saw you get off the train this morning. Saw as you got attacked. Saw everything.\nBut she doesn't talk much, and I think few grown-ups would believe her. It's better than nothing, though.
 Thank you. I'll have a word with her.
 I'd rather not drag an orphan girl into it. This business is murky enough as it is.
 Yesterday, I was told you had killed your father.
 …And you immediately believed it.
 Who told you that?
 Oh, of course! I finally achieved my childhood dream!
 The whole Town believed it. First, people found out he was dead. Then, they learned he was killed by an outsider. And then they described you.
 You're an idiot.
 The only fact in that pile of shit is I arrived on the night of his death.
 You knew how much I cared for him! So why, you idiot? What for?
 That's not far from the truth, Burakh.
 I'm two seconds away from breaking your jaw.
 You knew, all this time, I'm not a murderer? You just meant it as… what, some metaphor? I called you a friend…
 Why did you come? Finally thought of some good excuses?
 You think I need to justify myself to you?
 I'm waiting for <i>your</i> excuse, and apology—which I may not accept.
 The best form of defense is offense. You've always done it well.
 Stakh, are you out of your mind?
 It was not only a death. He was murdered.
 How many people live in this town, moron? Yet you still point to me as the culprit!
 You betrayed him. You left when he needed you most. He cried out for your help, but you didn't care. He was in peril, and you were too busy elsewhere. He believed, truly <i>believed,</i> that your arrival would put an end to his troubles. \nAnd, as always, he was right.
 …That's not true.
 Are you raving mad, Rubin?
 Take a breath, calm down, and explain. What peril? What do you know?
 Lara said I'm stupid, that I've lost my marbles. But I haven't! \nYour father always taught us to take stock of the situation, Burakh. Overall? You're unneeded here. Don't bother with your father's inheritance. He has better heirs.
 Like you?
 Lara's right. You <i>are</i> stupid.
 Already thinking about the inheritance, huh? Some of us still grieve.
 And why not? I was his student. I preserved his knowledge while you wiped your ass with his letters. I was always by his side.
 Including the night he was murdered?
 I am <i>this</i> close to hitting you.
 Here's his letter. The only one I received. Look here, idiot—he mentions a threat. What could it be?
 Shut up. Your father's inheritance is his <i>work</i>, Burakh. That's his legacy! You are completely unworthy of it. His work is not yours. His knowledge is not yours. You abandoned both.
 <i>He</i> sent me away, jackass! He wanted me to study elsewhere!
 Go elsewhere, then. Learn whatever it is you'll learn there. \nHere, you have no place. And if the Kin tells you to let go of his burden, listen—perhaps even that scum can be right, sometimes. You're out of your depth here.
 Poor Stakh. You know, I don't even want to hit you anymore.
 You're hysterical, man. You're barely making sense.
 I'm not going anywhere. You should listen to Gravel. You're acting stupid.
 …No. He wouldn't tell me. Suggested we wait for you to arrive. But you were in no hurry, were you? His first letter was sent in May!
 I only got a single letter. Two, maybe three weeks ago!
 There's a war, asshole. You think the trains come to this town often?
 His inheritance isn't… <i>things!</i> It's different. And don't you dare accuse me! As for you, Gravel, don't interfere.
 Who's investigating the murder? No one! But all you care about is some "inheritance." And you <i>dared</i> to accuse me. Tell me what you know!
 I know he was murdered. By someone he knew, too. Someone he trusted. Someone who could easily enter his house!
 This is what's important, idiot. Not an inheritance!
 …No.
 What <i>do</i> you know, then? Some student…
 I'm listening.
 I'm Artemy Burakh.
 No, <i>I'm</i> listening. Where's my father's body?
 Ahh, the patricide. You've spared me the trouble of hunting you down. You there! Seize him! And take him to number three, I think it's free.
 Patricide? Have you gone mad?
 Strike, if you will, but hear!
 I won't forget this.
 Oh, it's you. We made you a prime suspect yesterday. By mistake. Sorry—that was rash. You were too convincing a suspect. \nBut I won't hear you complain. The error wasn't irrevocable.
 Right. Not like you had me executed or anything. Nothing irrevocable about being branded a murderer and hunted like a dog.
 Did you find my father's murderer?
 Forget about it. My house is sealed off on your orders. So's the district. I need the key and a pass.
 I had a cozy place to sleep last night, thanks to you. But today I'd like to go to my own place. I need the key.
 Spare me the sarcasm, Burakh. \nLet's get this straight. You're still a suspect, and you'll be a suspect until the murderer's found and proven guilty. The only reason you're walking free is something called "the presumption of innocence." Do I make myself clear?
 Good thing some smart people told you about that.
 Perfectly. Where's my father's body?
 I head no investigation. There's no organized search. I hold no official post here, in case you had any illusions on that part.\nMy power is that of reputation. Traditionally, our family enforces order in the Town on the rare occasions that it's broken. And those are rare—believe me. This is a peaceful little town.
 I know. A village. And you're the sheriff.
 How can you talk about order if no one's looking for the murderer?
 Taken to the cemetery. \nHe was a steppe man, wasn't he? By the rites of the Kin, the deceased is to be buried on the day of death, or at least as quickly as possible. So the preparations should be underway already.
 Why didn't you start by saying that?!
 Then I need to hurry.
 Anything else I can help you with?
 My house is locked. Do you have the key?
 The house was locked by the committee that examined the crime scene. There may be evidence. It's in your best interest. And that of the committee.
 …The investigation that doesn't exist. Great.
 And what did the committee find?
 Nothing of interest. We don't have any professional investigators in town. Is it so hard to understand?\nAlthough one Bachelor Dankovsky, who the Kains invited from the Capital, expressed an interest in their summary. I found it appropriate to share their findings with him. So you may inquire with him.
 I will. Now I need the key.
 You may have the key. That house is your property, and I have no legal grounds to prevent your access.
 Exactly.
 So can I go home now?
 I need a pass. Your people are blocking off the district.
 If you want to go immediately, you won't be allowed in anyway.
 Why?
 The district was blocked off on my orders—and Bachelor Dankovsky's advice. Staying there might be unhealthy. Only medical personnel are allowed.\nBut I recall that you're a doctor, correct?
 Yes. So sign a pass for me, and I'll leave you alone.
 Yes, so I can take care of my own health.
 Anything else?
 The district is cordoned off by your people. I need a pass.
 You're a prickly man, Saburov. That can't be good for your health.
 You're a doctor, correct? In that case, you may have it.
 A surgeon.
 A doctor, yes.
 What does it matter?
 Our big-city guest, Bachelor Dankovsky, has issued a warning that the district might be unsafe for medical reasons. That's all I can tell you at this point.
 Good enough for me. Hand over the pass.
 Nosy, isn't he? Our big-city guest.
 Yes, you were acquainted with our jail yesterday. \nBut, having seen the jails of other towns myself, I will repeat: I will not hear you complain. The food was hot and filling, the cot was dry, and even the rats were polite enough, as far as I know. I will not apologize for doing my job.
 Commendable. Public safety's clearly in good hands.
 Why are you covered in blood?
 …I fell down the stairs.
 Who are you?
 That's not important. Who <i>you</i> are, that's important.
 Really?
 I'm Old Burakh's son.
 You're an outsider. I've never seen you before, and I know everyone.
 I'm from here, but I've been away for a while.
 Yikes, kid, why are you glaring at me like that?
 You do look like the Old Man. You could be his son.
 I <i>am</i> his son.
 What I wanna know is, why are you covered in blood?
 It's none of your business.
 Haven't you seen what the streets are like?
 …What's wrong with you, kid?
 Whatever… but I'll remember you.
 Likewise. Nice meeting you.
 My advice, kid? Watch your tongue.
 I didn't touch anything!
 …What are you doing here, weirdo?
 The hell… What's going on here?
 Oh… An old friend of mine, I see.
 Weirdo yourself. Can't you see? I'm working.
 …While not touching anything. Yes, I see.
 You mean you're training?
 Working on your lockpicking skills?
 Dogs need training. I need to get things done.
 I'm all ears.
 This looks suspicious.
 Well, I'm not leaving. You got that?
 I got it, I got it. Are you… catching rats, or something?
 Yes you are, if I want you to.
 Why are you yelling at me? Old Man and I, we used to do a lot of stuff here! I even figured out how to crystalize blue salt. Made extracts myself. You think I was just helping him? I know a lot of stuff!
 Aren't you a smart one.
 What is that thing on the table, then? Did you make it all by yourself, hmm?
 No need to be nasty.
 Mind your manners. What is that thing?
 Well, if you're the nice one here, go ahead and <i>kindly</i> tell me how you got in.
 It's a mixer. Old Man used to make medicine here. Like… tinctures, I think he called it. Extracts. From all kinds of gross stuff.
 So you know how to operate it?
 Easy. Someone needs to work the machine, after all, while the Old Man walks the steppe. So I volunteered. Our kind doesn't need keys.
 What is this machine anyway?
 So Father didn't give you a key after all! I thought you were an apprentice of his… but you're more like a cat.
 For some reason neither of them works. Can you fix them? And I'll… I'll do anything. Just don't make me go.
 Let's see. Perhaps I can fix them.
 All right, you little house imp. Stay. There's enough room for both of us here.
 Hey! You know, I can make a painkiller concoction all on my own! I can clean the machine! I can take it apart and put it back together, all the pieces!
 You mean this machine?
 Rise and shine! Don'tcha dare kick the bucket on me, lowlife. Round here, we die on our own terms, not by the hand of others.
 Where am I?
 Was I unconscious?
 Look, pal, this won't do. Gave up my own blanket to carry you. Guess what you did? …You coughed up blood all over it, asshole. You owe me a blanket now. A nice wool blanket. I wouldn't mind seein' a little spirit from you, either. Y'know what I mean?
 What happened to me?
 I don't have a blanket. I'll drag you here, too, if you're ever in trouble…?
 So there you are, dead as a doornail. Down we dive to pluck your teeth out, then—wow, turns out you're alive! And Crop over there says, don'tcha touch 'im, you vultures, he's Bad Grief's best friend since childhood! Well, Crop, this time, was not full of shit. Now Bad Grief's all happy, even rewarded us. Go ahead, say hello, he's over there.
 Bad Grief, huh… we used to be friends, true. Surprised he's still alive.
 Well, thank you.
 So he's your leader now? Took the low road, I see…
 You owe me a blanket. Got it? And a little gift for savin' you, somethin' top-shelf…
 I got it, I got it.
 Like hell.
 Since Bad Grief's so happy I'm here, ask him.
 In the Community. Be respectful, all right?
 I'm as respectful as it gets. How did I get here?
 Knives. Scissors. Blades. Razors. Anything sharp. If you've got a sharp axe, I'm interested.
 Getting armed and ready?
 How about sharp wit? It can cut deeper than a knife.
 Got a scalpel?
 Those items are what I barter for. We need them.
 And what would you give me for sharp objects?
 Lockpicking shivs. If you're handy with locks, you can open three or four doors with one. Brand new! And needles. Good for smaller locks. Like locker locks.
 So you trade needles for knives? Strange.
 Oh, so you aren't a local… We aren't allowed razors. If they catch us, we'll be grounded for a year. Might even get spanked!
 Nice try with the bullshit, but I'm not buying it. Razors aren't the only forbidden sharp objects. So where'd you get all those pins? Did you break into a tailor shop?
 I'm a local. I'm familiar with the law. Children aren't to touch sharp objects.
 Thank you, thank you for actually coming! You're so brave! Look, we all made a gift for you, to welcome you here. See? It's bread! Please don't frown… It's all we can spare. We need to eat, too. There's a lot of mouths to feed here.
 Why are you doing this?
 Thank you. When I get my house back, come visit. I'll return the favor.
 Sorry it's so stale! And drink the milk fast, because it'll go bad soon. But the water is fresh from a ravine!
 No, wait—keep this! Especially if you don't have much to give!
 So you kids are all hungry too?
 But you're a guest! Take it! Or else we'll get bad luck. We need luck more than food right now.
 Ugh… Okay, I understand. You poor souls. I'll take it. Thanks.
 If I start taking food from half-starved urchins, I'll be the one with bad luck. Forget it.
 Well, yeah. We are on our own, after all.
 I can't accept this gift.
 All right. Thanks for the gift, kids. It sure is timely.
 And you are…?
 Mind your own business. That guy over there… Piecework, I take it?
 A doctor. From Bad Grief. Tell me what happened.
 That's him, all right. You're one of our lot, then?
 Independent. Got water?
 One of ours got himself cut, is what happened! A shiv stuck in his side. Lot of blood, see? At least he's breathin' for now…
 Got water?
 No. Don'tcha forget to give him alcohol! Or powders, anything. Gotta kill the pain first. \nA twitchy man, this one. He'll flop around like a fish.
 "Powders"? …You have no idea how to perform an operation.
 Alcohol does nothing to reduce pain, idiot.
 But you got somethin' to cut with? That damned thing's stuck deep. Tried to get it out with a knife, didn't work. Need those special knives… scalpels?
 Yes, I see you're experts at poking around with knives. You probably started this whole mess, didn't you?
 Yes, idiots, I do have a scalpel. Now shut up so I can work.
 No! We were doin' God's work. Who did away with old Burakh? A shabnak, that's who. So we tracked the maneater!\nThen all the steppe trash poured in, yelling that she's no shabnak. They took out shivs… ten of 'em on two!
 You slaughtered a living woman?!
 What shabnak? What are you on about?
 I've seen the Stake Lot fire. Was that your doing, too?
 A shabnak. The shabnak. A steppe creature, belched out by Earth. Not a local, are you? \nA shabnak's not human, but clay and bone. Bones taken from clay, I mean. As in, from below. Looks like a steppe girl, but it limps on both legs.
 Have you lost your mind? Whom did you kill?
 We avenged Burakh. Piecework himself grabbed her. \nDon'tcha glare at me like that! C'mon, help the man! Can'tcha see he's about dead? Do what Bad Grief said. Some doctor he's sent us…
 Shut up. I'm on it.
 Bad Grief told me to search his stomach for anything he doesn't need. So that's what I'll look for.
 Hey, I can hear him breathin' now… all normal!
 What is this… splinter?
 He'll live. Unless he dies.
 You're clearly not from around here. This is a local tradition. We don't keep knives—they might call it <i>cutlery,</i> but it sure ain't for cuttin'.\nGodless beasts, who fear neither life nor death, make these… disposables. You jab once, then it breaks. All about observing the custom.
 I'm from around here. I know about the custom.
 The custom has nothing to do with breaking shivs, asshole. It's about not cutting bodies—at all!
 What? What have you done? You monster!
 I did what I was told. I cut out anything he didn't need.
 I've just gotten started. You're next. So what will it be? You can lie down on your own, or I can help you lie down.
 So what, is the asshole still in there? The one with the carpet bag?
 Watch your tongue, boy. Though I do agree with you.
 Yeah, he's in there. I hereby grant you every right to throw something at him, if you so desire.
 But where's Doctor Rubin? We need a doctor!
 Rubin isn't here, kids! We got zero Rubins left in stock.
 That obnoxious dandy is a doctor. A well-trained one, I suspect.
 I'm a doctor. What's the issue?
 There's been a disaster! Alma, Duke, and Wolfling were poisoned!
 Where are they?
 Sorry, poisons are not my area of expertise. I deal in broken jaws, cracked ribs… That kind of thing.
 A doctor, my ass! We tried talking to him already, and he just shooed us away…
 He was probably right. You're obviously up to no good…
 What! Has he forgotten the Hippocratic Oath? I should give him a firm reminder…
 In a warehouse with little flags! Go down the railroad and to the left. You'll see it.
 Lead the way.
 All right, I'll check it out.
 I have enough on my plate right now, kids. Try to find Rubin.
 I can't. We need to go to a drugstore, and find bones, and a whistle, and a shovel! Or Notkin'll bite our heads off. You'll find the place on your own, it's easy.
 Bones and a whistle are your cure for poison? Well, good luck with that.
 I will, I know that warehouse.
 You're the man everybody's after, right? You look like the description…
 I'm not. And I don't.
 The one and only.
 Oh? What's the description?
 Really? Well, whatever… It's good we found you. We need help!
 What for?
 Not from me. Go home, girl.
 We need to hold a trial for a murderer. And we can't do it without you. Will you help?
 Hold a trial? You kids play funny games.
 The fastest judge in town is camping out at Rubin's place. Go see him. Cheers.
 What? You've caught a murderer? Or was it <i>the</i> murderer?
 It's not a game, it's for real! Notkin said, "If you see him, drag him over." He also said, "Or else we'll choose the punishment on our own, and it won't end well."
 This is blackmail.
 Fine. Where's the courthouse?
 The courthouse is a warehouse. The one with little flags. Hurry up, they're starting soon!
 The warehouse with little flags? Oh, I remember… Seems like you kids took over our old place.
 You'll figure it out without me. I'm a bad judge.
 It's kinda hard to say… So, will you come?
 Let's go.
 Well, if you're telling the truth, then I'm in luck.
 You know… Big, fat, dangerous, with bulgy eyes, a weird leg, a scary mug, and a stupid look on his face. Must be you.
 Thanks, kid. At least I know what I look like now.
 My expression isn't stupid, kid. It's bewildered and confused.
 Black… mail? Where?
 Here. You're all just trying to pressure me into something. Home sweet home, I guess.
 Forget it. If I'm around, I'll drop by. Maybe I'll get there in time to hear the verdict.
 There… Locked shut. Won't let anyone in. Not that I object… There must be order. And so, it was ordered.
 What are you all waiting for? Me?
 Our house was locked? Who ordered that?
 What happened? Spit it out!
 So you're Burakh's son, then? The one who left town so long ago? You missed him by hours… Guess it wasn't in the cards. \nCouldn't you have gotten here, say, yesterday? Everything would be different then. And he waited for you so eagerly…
 Get on with it! What happened?
 I know. I got here as fast as I could. So where's Father?
 Saburov, of course. The governor.
 And where did my father go?
 Old Burakh is dead.
 …Dead?!
 No. It can't be.
 Dead. No one knows how. Rumor has it, he was murdered. A load of bull. He was like a father to all of us. Who would kill him? I don't buy it.
 Neither do I.
 So that's who was killed tonight.
 Guess your best wasn't good enough.
 What do you mean?
 The crowd's gone mad… like frightened children. So eager to catch someone, anyone—and no idea who. Some say it was an outsider. Others, a shabnak. When it hits home, people are quick to drag the clay wench from the depths of memory.
 What clay wench?
 Why an outsider?
 A shabnak-adyr. A thing of steppe legends.
 Yes, I know about it.
 I don't recall what it is.
 Earth is living. In the wake of great change, wrath, pain, fear, anxiety—all these grow in its belly, until one day it disgorges a creature of clay and dead bones. \nIt often looks like a woman. And the longer it walks among us, the more it looks like a living person.
 Bullshit. Old wives' tales.
 And you think a shabnak killed my father?
 Well, maybe the killer was a shabnak. Who else? A person couldn't have done it.
 You think so?
 People are capable of anything. Father says… used to say… this often.
 Isidor was a man. Men must not kill men, and so, men do not kill men. At least not in this town, they don't.
 Obviously they do now.
 Maybe you're right.
 Bullshit.
 Who else?
 I don't know. But I'll find out.
 And a… shabnak? Honestly, you're hardly better than a pack of children.
 Oh, but of course he wasn't <i>killed.</i> People are mad with grief, so they parrot nonsense. And Saburov, he's only too happy to prey on these rumors.\nHe'll dig his claws deep into this case to flaunt his value, mark my words.
 Saburov? So he's in charge now?
 A domineering leader, then?
 Well, yes and no… The real ruler is Fat Vlad. Money's power, and the Town's business all belongs to Olgimsky. The Factory, the Abattoir, the railroad: all his. \nThe Kains still have the power of fear. And Saburov, well, he's technically the leader of the three. But only technically.
 So now he's showing off his value?
 Where's my father's body?
 Tell me about it. Obviously it isn't murder. But he's given the order to seize anyone who might be even remotely suspicious. If I were you, I wouldn't go to Saburov…\nAlthough, he did take the key. And you probably want to pay your last respects to your father. He was taken by Saburov's men.
 Where?
 No clue. People used to bring the dead to your father… You know, a doctor. How will we live now? No idea.\nUnbelievable. The war, the train delayed… What a terrible year! Do you even have a place to stay now?
 Yes. I have friends in town. Three, at least. They'll help me.
 I'll go to Saburov. Although, given all this… maybe it's not a good idea.
 I don't need to go anywhere. I'm home.
 Look! See, everyone? The doctor is here!
 Why do you think I'm a doctor?
 Who's sick?
 So you've found the murderer, huh? And I've heard there will be a trial?
 We've been looking for a doctor since morning. What other reason would a grown-up have for coming here?
 Tell me about your problem.
 You're too late! They died! Why didn't you come sooner? <i>What kind of doctor are you?</i>
 Three kids are dead and no one gives a damn?!
 I've been asking myself that question all day…
 Not kids. Worse. Those were our dogs. Alma, Wolfling, and Duke…
 Who poisoned them?
 I'm sorry to hear that. I'm a dog person myself.
 Ugh! And here I was thinking…
 Somebody evil. Notkin's planning on holding a trial… He wanted you to be there, too.
 Well, at least I made it in time for the trial. Not all is lost.
 Oh, come on. This is a waste of my time.
 Of course we did. Took us two hours.
 Where are they?
 Ask Notkin. He's waiting for you. Said it's trial first, punishment after.
 What about the victims? I was told someone was poisoned?
 Is Notkin the one on the crate? Got it, thanks.
 That traitor Lika saw you this morning, by the way. How you got off the train, and beat those thugs to a pulp…
 Huh! So I have a living, breathing witness…
 Well, I hope he turns this undying legend into a song when he grows up.
 Not for long. He's doomed.
 We'll see about that.
 Yeah? How come?
 He killed Duke, Wolfling, and Alma. Notkin will punish him for that.
 Don't you need to make sure he's the real culprit first? I'm speaking from experience, here.
 Not so fast. I need him to confirm my alibi first.
 And not only them, it seems. No way. I'll punish him myself.
 Don't go in there, buddy. If you do, you won't come out.
 I'll risk it.
 Why not?
 Although… at least they'd feed you in jail. You'd have a chance to rest and wait it out until the birds stop squawking and return to their nests.
 What birds?
 A poet, then. No wonder no one's seized you.
 Because Saburov will seize you first, just like he did the rest, and investigate your guilt later.
 I know what I'm guilty of, and it's not what he's worried about.
 Thanks for the advice.
 People are like flocks of birds. When the earth shakes or the wind howls, they startle and squawk. Some frightened, while others parrot and echo…\nWho started it? Why? Where does the wind blow from? When will it end? No one decides this. The flock doesn't think, it just listens—and only to itself.
 I know. Hysteria's the same in the north.
 Yes, I remember. Our town's like this.
 …So you're a trained surgeon? Good… This is good. Shame that your esteemed degree is of no help to me.
 Why is that?
 What do you need, gramps?
 I don't have a degree. The war snatched away my chance to graduate.
 The Kin has not accepted you yet. You are Burakh's son, but sharing blood is not enough. Supposedly you're a menkhu by birth, but in truth, you aren't.\nYou went away to study who knows where, leaving your people behind. Old folk don't appreciate that. Will the Kin accept you at all?
 A menkhu… Does this word mean anything to any of you still?
 I'm not a steppe man. But I do know that among your lot, only menkhus can become butchers, wise men, or surgeons. Because they know the Lines. \nIs that what you call it? The art of understanding the world? The Lines?
 Yes. The Lines.
 Those are ancient beliefs of a dying people. No one takes them seriously anymore.
 Your father did. And he was a wise man in every meaning of the word. Not just a doctor. A truly wise man.
 Will you all just leave my father alone!
 Father… was very attached to tradition. But what is gone, is gone.
 That's even better.
 How is it better?
 No, old man, it's not better. I'm a nobody.
 How do I put it? I have a certain need. But now that Old Burakh is dead, no one can help me out. Including his son. Don't even offer.
 Why can't I help?
 I wasn't planning to.
 …And that's why you and I have nothing to talk about yet. You may know how to wield a scalpel, but you don't know the Lines. \nAnd in this town, no one would trust you to cut a body before you comprehend the world's design. So you can't help me out.
 Who are you anyway?
 Spare me your troubles, old man. I've got enough of my own.
 I'm Var. I have… a business. An unusual one. Your father used to deliver… certain goods to me. \nNow I came to ask Bad Grief… He's a bandit, after all, a law unto himself. But turns out, he's too lily-livered to cross this particular boundary…
 What kind of business?
 You must be asking wrong then. I've known Bad Grief since we were kids—there is no boundary he wouldn't jump over. So talk to him, not me.
 I buy blood. And organs. Body components. Human components.
 …What for?
 You're no menkhu. You wouldn't understand. Forget it.
 Forgotten already.
 Show me where you live. I want to talk to you about the Kin some more.
 Ah… It's you. Did you come to talk about your father?
 Yes. Did you know him?
 No. I brought you something, old man. Is this what you needed?
 So you dared… But you're not ready yet. You're trying to put the cart before the horse. It will get you into trouble.
 I'm a daring sort. So are you taking this or not?
 I'm not as hasty as you think. First, tell me why you need this.
 I did. But that's not what someone as clueless as you should addle their brain about. You left this town as a boy. You never really knew it, and even those scraps are lost and forgotten now. Educate yourself. Breathe in the twyre-soaked air. Get to know elders.\nHurry not, Burakh. Achieve respect. Then you'll have your answers.
 Heard you loud and clear, old man. Var, is it?
 But I do have to hurry. Look, I brought you something.
 I won't. You're not a real menkhu yet. You won't understand.\nIf you choose to rush headlong into this, I'm not the one to judge. And I will accept the goods. But it's not my job to educate you.
 Then you can't have the goods.
 I need coin. Take it.
 Who are you? What do you want?
 This place smells of blood.
 I'm Artemy Burakh.
 Burakh is dead. And what the fuck do you want, Artemy the Nameless?
 Just dropping by.
 Watch your tongue, old man. I'm Burakh's son.
 Who sent you?
 I'm on my own.
 I'm Isidor Burakh's son.
 Did you bring me blood, Isidor Burakh's son?
 Do you buy it?
 Either give me the goods or get lost.
 What goods are you interested in these days?
 I think getting lost is my preferred option here.
 Day blood. Kidneys, spleens, hearts. No longer than two hundred minutes on the ice. And don't try to swindle me.
 Huh… That's some unusual trade you have.
 Got it. I'll be sure to drop by if I have any.
 How much?
 I think I'll tell on you leeches to the governor. Then again, you two probably conspire.
 I'll tell you when I see it.
 Fair enough.
 These things don't come cheap.
 Emshen, brave man. Strong is his spirit. How fares your kine, emshen? Bite kharaan, for he has come to pay last respects to his father. We have, too.
 How fares your kine, Khatangher?
 Bayarlaa, thank you. Why is my father still unburied?
 Bite kharaan, ubshe is at the threshold. The loss is great. A need to speak, to say the words correct. Observe the rite.
 I've come to pay last respects to my father. Why do I see this sight?
 Khodo khara, Burakh-esegher carried a great burden. Owed a great debt. Who is to take his duty upon himself?
 I'm not here for his duties. I need to inspect his wounds.
 Be khara, it's not that easy. What does he owe?
 Before the eyes of the Kin and the Earth, this is what I have to say: I, his son, accept his duty as my own. The Sky is my witness.
 A bow for you, emshen. The first blood yours. Be khara, emshen is a man. A brave man.\nHere stands Sahba, Sabha Usp'tae. You have accepted his duty. Now, come into the inheritance. Sahba will show you the way.
 Bayartai, khyn. Thank you.
 Bayarlaa. I have done what needed to be done. There was no choice.
 Yes. I have just done a brave deed.
 You've gone wrong, emshen. You stumble wrong. Be khara, you knew not what you came for, so you welcome the wrong guest. Say now: do you accept his duty as your own?
 Be tatgalzah. I don't. I can't.
 Before the eyes of the Kin and the Earth, this is what I have to say: I, his son, accept his duty as my own. The Sky is my witness.
 He told us not, emshen; he took it to the grave. You ask the wrong people. Too late, emshen, now. The Earth waits. Say now: do you accept his duty as your own?
 Be tatgalzah. I don't. I can't.
 Before the eyes of the Kin and the Earth, this is what I have to say: I, his son, accept his duty as my own. The Sky is my witness.
 Wait. I want to take a look at the body first.
 Be khara, emshen is cautious. Who is it will judge him? If the Earth shall not take Burakh-esegher, let us burn him.
 Whatever. I just want to be finished with this.
 …No. This isn't right. Before the eyes of the Kin and the Earth, this is what I have to say: I, his son, accept his duty as my own. The Sky is my witness.
 Many soon will leave. Hurry, emshen.
 Wait here.
 Wait here for you, yes. Say now: do you accept what he owes?
 Be tatgalzah. I don't. I can't.
 Before the eyes of the Kin and the Earth, this is what I have to say: I, his son, accept his duty as my own. The Sky is my witness.
 …Yet it had to be done. A cruel deed, but necessary. An inoculation.
 Father! Can you hear me?
 …No need for repentance, nor confessions. I should have done it five years ago, during the First Outbreak. I wasn't brave enough. It was spreading like wildfire.
 Father! Who murdered you?
 Father, what did you owe? Why did the Earth expel you?
 Father, who are you talking to? It's me, Artemy. Your son.
 No need for fear, either. Death is not the worst fate for a man, nor a town, for that matter. To earn their right to live, one must first pass the trial of death. I have only recently realized that, but it's true. Tell that to the Kin.
 You're talking to someone else…
 Did I do the right thing today? Did I choose the right path?
 I'm sorry I was late. I tried. But… I didn't try hard enough. I'm sorry.
 …It will be difficult, and terrible. My heart aches for those who will fail the trial. Some will die. Many will. And yet, we couldn't keep living the old way. How did we differ from animals? That's nature: Only the strong survive.
 What are you talking about?
 What happened five years ago?
 You don't need to explain yourself to anyone!
 …Yes, it sounds cruel. The words of tyrants who start wars and reform countries. But we're talking about nature. We can't just lock the door when it knocks. We must face it, proving our right to live on this earth.
 Just know that I… I respect you, and love you.
 I won't let you down.
 Forgive me.
 …Especially since there will be no rest… Not ever.
 The rest is silence.
 …All right. I understand.
 Indeed, there won't be.
 Hey, big guy! No loitering. Keep walking.
 What's going on?
 What do you mean, no loitering? This is my house!
 Was there another murder?
 By the order of Governor Saburov, entrance is by permit only. If you want in so badly, go to the Town Hall and get one.
 What's this stuff in the air?
 Go to Saburov for help? I'd rather go to hell.
 I bet there was an accident at the plant. A fire, or a pipe burst, who knows…Now all this soot is pouring out, and the plant is dead in the water.\nExplains why the Termitary's on lockdown when there isn't any work to do. No sense in letting them roam the streets. An accident—what else could it be?
 So you think this is factory soot, huh?
 Something stinks here.
 Accident or not, let me in!
 Take a look at this grimy air. Sticky and thick, like snot… If I were you I'd get out of here right now. Me and my pal have been standing here for a couple hours already, and we're sick as hell from it. Damned shift change can't come soon enough.
 I need to get inside.
 Come back with a stamped permit from Saburov and we'll let you in. While you're at it, get him to send in another shift!
 You can rot here for all I care.
 I have better things to do.
 Now everyone acknowledges you. Everyone says you have embarked upon the path of your father.\nMake it so they unlock the Termitary. Bite kharaan, something's off about it. Trouble must be brewing.
 What trouble?
 It's not in my power.
 We don't know. Make them tell us. Make them open the Termitary.
 Make who? Fat Vlad? He won't listen.
 Gonna ask me to grant three wishes, too?
 Everyone says you're now a menkhu. Once you're allowed to cut bodies, cut my brother, please. Release him of evil meat, so he may speak.
 I'm not a menkhu yet, but I'm working on it.
 Menkhu? What does that mean?
 When will I be allowed to do that?
 How can you not know? Be khara, you're laughing at me. A menkhu knows the body's Lines. A menkhu knows the composition of everything.
 When I know everything, your grandchildren will be grandparents.
 The elders will say when. Can we bring my brother to you? Will you cut away his pain?
 Sure.
 If I myself live to see that fine moment.
 You were unjustly suspected yesterday, but now everyone believes you. My sister is about to give birth. The older women say the child is big, she is small, and so she will die if not helped. Will you help her?
 I will. Bring her here when her water breaks.
 Where did you all even come from…
 Hate to break it to ya, big fella, but we don't let just anyone in.
 What do you want, a password?
 I'm here to speak to Khan.
 Nah, no passwords. All I want is an answer to a simple question. No strings attached.
 Ask away.
 Go ahead. I could use one of those lately.
 Are you older than eighteen?
 Obviously.
 Is this a joke? I'm almost thirty.
 Just as I thought. Fuck off, big fella. We're sixteen and under here. Tried to cut you a little slack what with your size, but this won't do.
 That's a bit harsh, don't you think?
 At least tell me… What's inside?
 I'm looking for a kid who goes by "Khan."
 Those are the rules. The Tower is all ours, no adults allowed.
 So, the Tower is chock full of kids?
 Khan? What do you want with him?
 Wanted to meet him.
 Important business.
 It's him who wants to meet me, not the other way around.
 We'd know if he wanted to see you. Know why you're all grown up? 'cause you forgot how to lie! There's an art to it.
 Got me there. Never been a good liar.
 I'm not getting in, am I?
 We got some space left. There's only seven hundred of us.
 What do you even do in there?
 Holy shit! Are you sure it won't fall?
 You're asking too many questions.
 To hell with these games. Tell Khan I said hi.
 Whatever. See you weirdos later.
 This place is on lockdown. Move along.
 Why?
 Let me through. I have the right to be here.
 I live there.
 What do you want?
 I need to talk to a certain girl. Taya Tycheek. Do you know her?
 Come on, let me in.
 If you want to bother someone, go do it at the pub. Or are you looking for trouble? We can help you out.
 Maybe we can strike a deal? A hundred coins, right now.
 Maybe I am.
 Go ahead and offer them to Fat Vlad if you're so smart. He's got plenty of room for coins. The man shits money. As for me, I like my head attached to my shoulders, thank you very much. So get out of here. Enough talk.
 Whatever.
 Fat Vlad, huh? There's a thought.
 We're not paid to ask questions. We're paid to stop people going in and out.
 Why are they screaming?
 I'd hate to have your job.
 Move along.
 This isn't the end of it.
 Keep your shirt on, soldier. Don't want to lose it.
 The orders were clear—no one's getting in under any circumstances.
 No means no. Got it.
 Why are they screaming?
 You got yourself infected with sand pest, Cub. Our dogs found you.
 Sand pest?
 Did I faint?
 Sand pest. That's what it's like. It struck once before, five years ago. A lot of people died. We used to play the plague game then, too…
 Five years ago, you say…?
 …So what, do you want to play more?
 It's deadly… Spreads like fire. Transmitted through touch. It infects items. Walls, drawers. The ground itself. It clings to you like mud…
 Like leprosy?
 Uh huh. Next you're going to tell me madness is contagious.
 It's in the air, too. If a sick person touches you, you can catch it. It's like smoke… Like a fog. If you breathe in infected air, you might get sick.
 I've seen that air.
 Unlikely. Few diseases are transmitted both ways.
 Here, have an immunity pill. So that you don't faint anymore. All right? Notkin gave us some, but you need it more.\nIt suppresses all kinds of diseases. It also tingles on your tongue.
 What about you?
 We're small. A single pill can last me a day. But I'm actually very healthy—my belly never even aches!
 Fine. Hand your pills over.
 
 Georgiy Kain plans to take my home for himself. If only I remembered where exactly he lives…
 I was summoned back to my hometown by a distressing letter from my father. I should hurry home.
 …Where do I go now?
 I need to find the people who still remember me. Who will believe me without proof. Who can vouch for me.
 I think I've done all I could for today. Now all that remains is to wait until the coast is clear.
 Anyone is free to take anything in the houses contaminated by odd black smog.
 
 Someone important was murdered tonight.
 My rights to the house have been restored.
 
 Home, sweet home welcomed me with its knives honed. What does this mean?
 There is a familiar name on Father's list.
 Capella has created a union of kids. She might know what Father wanted with them.
 In his letter, Father wrote that he will face a difficult trial. Or did he write "we"? I don't remember…
 
 
 I met a funny dog-eared kid at the Station. What was he doing there?
 Home sweet home is locked. The local authorities must have the key. I can't keep pretending it doesn't concern me.
 
 The dog killer is the doghead who saw me at dawn. He could testify to my alibi. \n\nBut I gave Notkin my word. The murderer will be tried.
 The dog killer is the doghead who saw me at dawn. He could testify to my alibi. But I like dogs, and he's disgusting. Let him go to hell.\n\nI wonder what Notkin will think of this.
 The dog killer is the doghead who saw me at dawn. He will testify to my alibi. We'll meet by the Town Hall.\n\nI wonder what Notkin will think of this.
 
 It's been foretold I will "spill a river of blood" soon. Guess someone will find their death under my knife, after all.
 Three poisoned patients are in a warehouse we used to play in when we were kids. They seem to require medical help.
 
 Murky was unhelpful. I can probably still see what Grace is doing until the dawn breaks. Not sure it's a good idea, though.
 The local urchins have found and are trying a murderer! Could it be…?
 
 
 The Soul-and-a-Halves want to punish the culprit who poisoned their dogs. But I don't want them to do something they'll regret for the rest of their lives.
 The Soul-and-a-Halves want to punish the culprit who poisoned their dogs. Well, it's their vengeance to deliver.
 
 Barter is not only a way to obtain useful items, but a way to get closer to people. Everyone has something of their own to share.
 What have they done to him? …Do I really want to know? What matters is, I think I have new allies now.
 What a twist. I robbed the Soul-and-a-Halves of their revenge… but somehow they're thankful for this.
 Seems like the local urchins need assistance.
 The Soul-and-a-Halves want to punish the culprit who poisoned their dogs. But I don't want them to do something they'll regret for the rest of their lives.
 Alexander Saburov, the Town's governor, is in charge of the investigation. I remember him. A stern man.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men, women, or teenagers.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men or women.
 The dog-eared boy didn't come. No witness. As expected.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any women, or any teenagers, either.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any women, or any kids, either.
 Seems like Saburov isn't inclined to listen to any explanations. He'll just throw me in jail, no questions asked. Should I still risk it…?
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any women.
 I should listen to well-intentioned advice next time… Or should I?
 I've bartered with most elements of the Town. Now they'll accept me as their own.
 
 Father's dead. I was too late.
 I need the stems of black, bloody, and brown twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of black, bloody, and brown twyre.
 Shabnak-adyr, a clay golem of local legends, steals the shape of a young woman.
 I need the stems of black and brown twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of bloody and brown twyre, and swevery.
 They couldn't suspect me of patricide, could they? Of course not. Impossible.
 I need the stems of black and brown twyre.
 I need the stems of bloody and brown twyre.
 Could Father have been killed by the very thing that made him summon me so urgently? It's possible…
 I need the stems of bloody twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of brown twyre, and swevery.
 Lara Ravel lives by the river, in a house called the Shelter. We used to be friends when were kids. Hopefully, she will at least let me sleep at her place.
 Now I only need the stem of bloody twyre.
 Now I only need the stem of brown twyre.
 Lara's Shelter is now my shelter. She's not as happy to see me as I hoped. Still, I can stay at her place.
 I've collected all the herbs. 
 
 Lara says there's a thief in her house.
 An odd guest visited Lara's house. I'm not superstitious, but I feel that she's not entirely human.
 To hell with it. Now is not the time to get misty-eyed with old friends.
 
 Lara told her neighbors that I'm innocent. The inhabitants of the nearby districts won't attack me anymore.
 So we've met. Can't say any of us are eager to meet again soon. Lara is alive and well, and that's good enough.
 
 It's been foretold I will "spill a river of blood" soon. Guess someone will find their death under my knife, after all.
 I invited Rubin to gather our childhood gang again. I wonder if he'll come.
 
 I'm not even sure there was a girl. Am I seeing things?
 Whoever it was, she won't bother Lara anymore. Clearly I'm her new target.
 Bad Grief doesn't seem interested in the old friendship. His loss! I'm not going to be some mother hen, rounding them all up.
 
 Rubin is my father's student. Almost a brother to me. I should see him. He will help.
 Lara, Bad Grief, Rubin, and I are meeting after dark in the old place, where we burned that fire for the first time. I hope we can connect again.
 We were planning to gather our childhood gang at the old place, but now is not a good time for nostalgia. I guess I should apologize to Lara.
 An out-of-town dandy kindly informed me that Stakh considers me a patricide. Madness. I guess it's for the best I missed him.
 Perhaps old friendships can be mended… but our lives will never be the same again.
 Perhaps old friendships can be mended, but even that doesn't seem to work out… In any case, our lives will never be the same again.
 Redhead Grigory Filin, aka Bad Grief, always goads me into doing crazy stunts. We used to have a secret lair in a warehouse.
 
 Some evenings, kids gather at the Station.
 Today, Bad Grief's mob is willing to drag me out of trouble—a warm welcome. Tomorrow, though, I doubt they'll be as welcoming. The mob's hospitality doesn't last long.
 
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place… and not just them.
 One of Grief's boys got stabbed. I promised to take a look at his wounded belly. Just gotta remember to bring a scalpel.
 
 The door locked behind us. According to the legend, I need to inspect the house and light up all candles I can find. Or wait until dawn.
 Bad Grief's henchmen were looking for a shabnak… by testing women with fire. That's what Piecework got his just deserts for.
 
 I lit up the final candle, and the door did open. Whatever it was, it's gone now. Now I need to grab the boys and leave this place.
 I'm a man of my word. The surgery is done, the shiv is out.
 That scum had neither heart nor brains, so he has no need for his guts, either. \n\nI'm a man of my word. I said I'd cut out anything he didn't need, so I did.
 I can't run from my fears forever. Sooner or later I'll have to take a look at Father's house.
 Day 1
 Bad Grief remembers me—while I'm useful, anyway. Not that he's of much help...
 A surgeon is not the kind of man to mess with, and Bad Grief was reminded of that. But he can't help my situation...
 Father is dead. The townsfolk treat me like a criminal. Where do I go now?
 Calm down. Collect my thoughts. I need to find the people who still remember me. Who will believe me without proof. Who can vouch for me.
 This Var claims to have done business with my father. He buys organs. \n\nBut I'm no menkhu. The local tradition does not allow me to cut bodies open.
 The high and the mighty of this town have finally taken notice of a Burakh. The witch hunt is over. I can now go out safely.
 I'm done with everything important for today. I'm free to rest until tomorrow… or explore the Town. At night, its face changes.
 I've broken a steppe taboo. I have cut a body open. This town does not provide the best working environment for a surgeon.
 
 Someone important was murdered tonight.
 Organs and hot blood—on a counter, just like that. If anyone finds out, I'm a dead man. But Var… he pays.
 
 Lara Ravel
 Grace
 Stakh Rubin
 Changeling
 Bachelor
 Notkin
 Utroba
 The Gut
 The Backbone
 
 
 
 A son's fate is to avenge his father's death. But first I need to see the body.
 I came into my legacy… sort of. I traced Father's path. I tried to take care of his patients… unsuccessfully. \n\nBut everyone still considers me a menkhu now.
 
 Father's funeral starts at dawn. And I doubt it will take all day.
 Father's funeral starts at dawn. And I doubt it will take all day.
 If I don't hurry, Father will be laid to rest… in the wrong way.
 Olgimsky's heir spends his days in a pub called the Broken Heart.
 
 Olgimsky's heir spends his days in a pub called The Broken Heart.
 They say Earth wouldn't accept Father. Literally.
 
 They say Earth wouldn't accept Father. Literally…
 Father's body was interred, as per the rite.
 Father's body was given to the sky. I don't care about ancient rites.
 I have accepted Father's duty… whatever it was. But what does it entail?
 I don't know what Father owed, so I can't be responsible for it. What does it mean for me?
 Father's body was given to the sky. There's no need to observe ancient rites.
 I don't know what happened to Father's body. I guess they burned him. I wasn't there.
 Sahba, also called Aspity, preserved Father's inheritance for me.
 
 A steppe woman called Aspity preserved Father's inheritance for me.
 The steppe woman gave me bizarre items. What do they mean?
 I took my inheritance, but I haven't come into it. A right needs to be proven with a deed. \n\nWhich deed will show that I'm truly my father's son?
 
 
 If I want to truly come into Father's legacy, I need to "follow in his footsteps," whatever that means.
 Murky
 
 Отец мёртв. Есть ли теперь смысл спешить домой?..
 Var
 Кривой горбун Вар покупает органы.
 
 
 Grace is talking to my father this very instant! How is that possible?
 
 
 Talking to the dead is killing Grace. Murky knows another way to meet with a dead man. A less cruel one.
 
 
 Father is dead. I won't waste a girl's life to touch his ghost.
 I talked to my deceased father… \n\nNo. I didn't. I met him, and we talked past each other.
 
 Father is dead. I won't waste a girl's life to have a word with his ghost.
 To talk to the dead Murky's way, one must first collect a bunch of herbs: three blades of twyre (blood, black, and brown), and one blade of swevery.
 
 
 I got the herbs.
 
 
 Big Vlad
 Влад Ольгимский желает меня видеть. Сомнительная удача.
 
 Bachelor
 
 
 Главная нода
 
 Aspity
 Bad Grief
 Young Vlad
 Capella
 Lika
 Alexander Saburov
 Sticky
 Dandy
 Catnip
 Snout
 Whisperer
 Onlooker
 Fingersmith
 Shiner
 Piecework
 Ace
 Ginger
 Messenger
 ???
 Revolver Ammo
 Not too fresh, but still able to satisfy a little hunger and thirst.
 Black powder. A lead flat-nosed bullet. It's heavy, weighing more than 17 grams. Contrary to popular belief, it doesn't always have its billet.
 Common rifle ammo.
 The local children call this pointed ammo "beakers." They often carry a couple in their pockets.
 Shotgun Ammo
 Common shotgun ammo.
 Perfect for putting on railroad tracks. Stakh, Gravel, Grief, and I would do it all the time as kids. Trains were more common back then.
 Averts bad fortune. Unhelpful to me, but some people value it.
 You can't bring about good fortune—but you can craft it, like this handwoven charm. I suppose I could trade it for something.
 Apple
 Each seed might one day become a tree, its roots permeating Earth.
 Peanuts
 Can be munched down—with little effect. The kids here would sell their souls for a handful.
 The game goes like this: find a nut that has traveled far, guess its name, shake it, and listen to stories from the soul trapped inside.\n\nThis originated with the Polyhedron. We didn't play it as kids.
 Gas Mask
 Protects the respiratory tract from lethal gas. In comparison, disease clouds are nothing.
 Very useful, until you consider the reasons why the Army had to mass-produce them.
 Army Gloves
 Protects against infection during contact, like when opening drawers. Of exceptional quality.
 One can't help but wonder how many triggers these gloves have pulled.
 Bandage
 Improves health. Stop bleeding, and you stop death—or delay it, at least. 
 Folks here believe that any affliction can be smothered in bandages, and any decently soft cloth can serve as one. Makes one wonder how people with such advanced medical knowledge even get sick at all.
 Bull Bell
 Did it bring luck to the one who wore it?
 This bell's inner surface is marked with sigils from the secret, sacred steppe alphabet. Like a human body, its insides mirror the universe.
 Blood
 A blood-filled flask.
 Blood is one of the primal elements. It bears life and death. Blood is compulsory.
 Bloody Bandage
 This is a dead item. Someone created it by using a bandage.
 According to sanitary procedures, any object that bears the trace of a deceased person's blood must be burned. According to local belief, it's pointless since the blood will simply appear elsewhere.
 Boots
 Secondhand boots, covered in reddish-black stains. Offer decent protection against contaminated air.
 Too low to traverse marshland, but they won't let you down otherwise. You can kick in doors and walk through trash without fear of blisters.
 Bracelet
 Worn to cut off the flow of warmth between the heart and the ring finger. Too small for me.
 A human body is the sum of its circulation. But it often needs to be interrupted for certain medical procedures.
 Brain
 A section of brain tissue.
 "Blood is only a stream of red and white cells. Sure, they contain information, but how can anything compare to the magnificence of the brain?" Dankovsky once demanded.\nYet a brain is only dull meat.
 Bread
 Bread is the heart of life. It's very filling.
 Never throw bread on the ground. If you're full, give it to a friend. No friends? Give it to an enemy. Hell, give it to a dog. Just don't waste it.
 At last! A crowd now gathers 'round my act! Sit down like that—now watch: Death by Starvation!
 Too busy… but speaking of starvation, have you got any food at all? I'd cut a man open for some dry old toast...
 This thirst keeps driving down toward my death.
 Don't be foolish. <i>I'm</i> the one dying of thirst.
 …I find myself exhausted. Soon to fall! "Dead tired," they say. I wonder what it means?
 I'm no good at riddles.
 …Drink some water, then?
 Indeed; see me act out your fate, dear fool. "Help! Someone help! This thirst is soon to kill me."
 Keep it up. I wanna know how it ends.
 You die, my friend; that's how it ends. Water is all around. Though puddles make poor drinks: Sip then from fountain spouts, from barrel bungs.\nA bottle is all that you need. Here, have one.
 Thanks for the bottle, foolish man.
 I have no water, sir! You see then how I suffer, knowing no solution.
 Same here…
 This is just bad acting. I'm not emotional like that.
 No? 'tis hard to tell, with you. But if you think yourself so smart, do say: what happens next?
 I don't know.
 Someone—not I!—gets a good kick.
 I'll manage without your ridiculous advice, somehow.
 So the good sir fancies a slice? Have one! Shan't last; in half hour's time, my act resumes. Come see: Death by Starvation, lads and lasses!
 That's okay. I'll just find another freak with toast.
 Wrong! You should look for freaks that trade in trash. Perhaps home-owning freaks too foolish to see as you rummage through their paltry things.
 I respect other people's property.
 …That's not a bad idea, actually. I think your "act" may be delayed after all.
 That so? Then our good audience shall their eyes soon feast upon our play: Death by Starvation! Burakh, can you now feel their hungry stares?
 …I think I'll just go. Thanks for the toast, weirdo.
 Fair enough… Can I get a lockpick, then?
 Tough luck. Fortunately, unlike you, I'm nowhere near starving.
 It means you need some sleep.
 When your exhaustion peaks, soon death follows. But how can one escape such a sad fate?
 By getting some sleep.
 Surprise me.
 But woe is me, for I've no place to sleep! Doors lock before this low Tragedian, now unwelcome here in his hometown.
 Same here.
 Is there no bunkhouse for the needy homeless in the Town?
 Go home, Burakh! Repose will do you good. But should you find another's cot: be quick to steal sleep. Sweet dreams, misfortune-seeker.
 …Thanks. And you, too.
 Who knows? But you, Burakh, are no mere tramp. A hero such as you won't be let in.
 I'll sleep when I'm dead, I guess.
 A lockpick might let me in, if I could get one…
 That, I do have for you. Here; have one. Still…
 What?
 You're right… I need to get home. Quickly.
 Be quiet! He must not hear your voice, lean close… He only speaks in lies, and wants you dead!
 I'll be damned. Does everyone want me dead?
 I… see. Care to elaborate on that, monkey-man?
 Do not go home, Burakh. Stay clear of home. In town, you have some friends yet, do you not?
 Let me guess… Father is unhappy with me, isn't he?
 Yes. Three of them. We were inseparable when we were kids.
 Unhappy? Far from it, far as can be. But still: Do not go home, I beg of you. Heed my words true, avert your doom, Burakh.
 Averting doom isn't my style.
 I am home, little man. And here I will stay.
 The Town is yours, Burakh. May you soon find how deep, how far its roots run down your spine. May you inhabit it; sink through its pores. Learn vein and artery, nerve and blood and cell.\nYou need no home beyond the Town itself. Forget that place you so eagerly seek. I beg forgiveness; grievous harm will come to me, should I tell you more than I can.
 Shut your eyes and hide under the covers, then. So no one can hurt you.
 I'll keep what you said in mind.
 Broken Ampoule
 This is a dead item. The carcass of an ampoule of morphine.
 Items used to improve health die. Who could possibly want this?
 Broken Scissors
 The Moerae must have been in a hurry.
 It's said that Clara the Changeling, a thief girl who claims to be a saint, can repair any sharp object just as easily as she cures the sand pest, simply by laying her hands on it.
 Beetle
 A surprising find in autumn, if not useless.
 Where do they go in winter?
 Canned Food
 Filling, although I'm not sure what kind of food is inside.
 Before I returned to the Town, I grabbed a whole sack of canned food. Survived on it for almost a week. I can hardly stand the smell now.
 Candle Stub
 The stub of a nuptial candle. It smells of Earth.
 They say when Wild Nina Kaina, the Dark Mistress of our town, so much as glanced at candles, they'd bow to her—even without wind. 
 A piece of chalk. Used to draw lines.
 Chalk
 The world is one whole, having form only where it is divided. Some Lines are natural; others, man-made. Chalk, composed of the dead bodies of sea creatures, is a good tool for setting boundaries.
 Chestnut
 There are no chestnut trees around, yet chestnuts are pervasive. Truly a town of mysteries.
 The game goes like this: find a nut that has traveled far, guess its name, shake it, and listen to stories from the soul trapped inside.\n\nThis originated with the Polyhedron. We didn't play it as kids.
 Black Twyre
 Blood Twyre
 Brown Twyre
 Coffee
 Coffee beans will immediately energize you, but it's very unhealthy.
 You can forego sleep with coffee—for a week or more, if need be, but it's a bad idea. Whoever refuses dreams dares fate to pass them over.
 It doesn't need people who can't think for themselves, either. "Grab him," they command, and you bite down right away. Let me go, old man. Be a good boy.
 You're the dog here, not me. Put this on.
 Invaluable if one needs to fix a gun or a relatively complex contraption.
 Big Vlad's factories are some of the only stable workplaces in the Town. Unfortunately, he keenly remembers that 'stable' has several meanings.
 Money
 Used to buy items in shops. Offering it during common street barter, however, would be seen as offensive.
 Coins from other times and countries can be found in the Town. Incredibly, shops and traders accept them all.
 Toast
 Soldier food. It's better to eat fresh bread.
 Stale bread is bad news. It doesn't breathe.
 Shoes
 Worn and unimpressive.
 It's forbidden for Herb Brides to have footwear: it's believed they speak with Earth through their rhythmic footsteps. Winter must get cold…
 Egg
 Nothing like a good egg. Delicious. The chicken has yet to be seen.
 People mostly eat unfertilized eggs. This is an empty illusion of possible life.
 Empty Bottle
 Can be filled with water or blood.
 No one drinks water from the Gorkhon river in our town, which is quite sensible. No one digs wells either, which is less so. \n\nClear drinkable water is valued. People can often tell which spring it is from by the taste.
 Executor Cloak
 Protects against infection during contact. The pendants serve no obvious purpose, but tearing them off would be a waste of time.
 Orderlies—the volunteer medical assistants—use these costumes borrowed from the local theatre as protective cloaks. This is the traditional costume of the Reaper, an allegory of Death.
 Cothurni
 Protective footwear. Helps one rise above their troubles—and the poisoned earth.
 This is theatrical footwear, worn by actors. It's likely the orderlies owe their awe-inspiring height to them.
 Muu Shubuun Mask
 Healing herbs placed inside the beak overwhelm all other smells. Protects against disease clouds.
 The mask of Muu Shubuun, "the wicked bird." Part of the Reaper costume from the local theatre. It doesn't have eyeholes: the mask is mounted above an actor's head, who peeks through a hole in the cloak.
 Fishing Hooks
 Sharp objects are regarded as dangerous and thus frowned on by the locals.
 Clara the deranged says that everyone has a hook to grab. But she's a manipulator. What everyone actually has is a knot to untie.
 Blood
 A blood-filled flask.
 Blood is one of the primal elements. It bears life and death. Blood is compulsory.
 Empty Flask
 An empty flask made of thick glass.
 Flasks are rarely used to store water. They're better suited for thicker liquids, like mercury, oil, or blood. 
 Forceps
 A medical tool for operating on soft tissue—for example, in the chest.
 Progress is unstoppable. Even in this remote place, operating with dedicated tools is better.
 …Fine, you've convinced me.
 Go home, all of you. Don't crowd around.
 And yet, I've returned.
 I see. So the house is off limits…
 Guts and shit. The usual.
 Shame. Guts are your area of expertise, not mine. Got enough shit on my hands as it is.
 Why do you ask? Just curiosity?
 What happened?
 Our Halves got poisoned. The doggies. Alma, Duke, and Wolfling.
 Who did it?
 Oh… That's a shame.
 Fish
 Fresh fish. Filling, but it makes your throat feel dry.
 The lateral line is called that for a reason: every fish sees its Line unfold in a stream of possibilities. Sometimes, that Line is a fishing line.
 Leather Gloves
 Protective handwear. Perfect for opening unsafe drawers and doors.
 The Factory recently began training tawers. When flesh fails, the owner of the Bull Enterprise, Fat Vlad, squeezes profit out of hide, too.
 Grindstone
 Used to sharpen knives, scissors... and scalpels.
 Sharp objects are frowned upon, for they are capable of disrupting the sacred wholeness of the body. But you can't cut bread with tradition, so people end up breaking the rule.
 Brain
 A section of brain tissue.
 Among medical conditions, the gravest and most dangerous are those that destroy consciousness, thought, and perception. The key to defeating any unknown disease is in the head.
 Infected Heart
 Ulcerous, yet still almost alive.
 "Every object has a heartbeat. Can't you hear it?"
 Heart
 A hot, almost-beating heart.
 In steppe lore, the center of mind and knowledge is the liver, while the center of feeling and emotion is the lower guts. They view the heart as a less crucial and rather mechanical organ that simply pumps life around, oddly arriving at a consensus with science-based medicine.
 Smoked Fish
 Salty. Spicy. Smells delicious, never spoils, and causes ravaging thirst.
 Once, we tried to tease Lara by calling her "Proud Trout." Instead of becoming offended, she said she respects fish for their calm and focus.
 Immunity Boosters
 Assorted pills of unknown origin. Boost immunity. Smell suspicious.
 Scientifically speaking, there's no consensus on if immunity can be boosted at all. However, these pills work well. According to the box, they were manufactured more than fifty years ago.
 Chisel
 Used to mark and sharpen tools. Handy when fixing bladed weapons and simple machinery.
 Rumor has it, Georgy Kain carved the statue in the Crucible's yard with his own hands. Drivel. Why would a Judge waste his time on that?
 Key
 It's cold.
 It reflects light at odd angles, making its true size difficult to discern.
 Kidney
 A human kidney.
 The body is a perfect representation of the universe. However, the steppe people are not so naive as to correlate organs and bones to cosmic or geographical features. First and foremost, they refer to connections and circulation.
 Kidney
 A human kidney.
 The body is a perfect representation of the universe. However, the steppe people are not so naive as to correlate organs and bones to cosmic or geographical features. First and foremost, they refer to connections and circulation.
 Leash
 Made of sturdy leather. Whoever gets leashed won't get away. Kids value it.
 All Soul-and-a-Halves have a leash. I think they represent humility towards their animal Halves. But what would a Doghead do with one?
 Lemon
 Eating a lot of lemons is bad for your teeth. They won't make you less hungry, but they're certainly an invigorating fruit.
 When life gives you lemons…
 Kashk
 A dry, fermented dairy product. Salty.
 While herding cows and bulls in the steppe, odonghs often live on water and kashk for months at a time. Nothing fancy, but it's nourishing.
 Liver
 A human liver.
 A body is not to be cut open. It's only allowed for menkhu—wise men who know where a body <i>wants</i> to give—and butchers, who accept sin. The word for butcher, "yargachin," also means "surgeon."
 Marbles
 Children give them names. They believe you can find a lost marble by calling after it.
 No one knows how marbles appear in the Town. No one makes or delivers them. They simply pop up here and there; on the floor, under the pillow, or right on the ground.
 Gauze Mask
 Protects against disease clouds. Made from sterile gauze.
 At school, we threw these masks out after one use, since they absorb infection. In the Town, masks are fixed up, boiled, and reused.
 Match
 Can't light an oil lamp without one.
 One must recall that which is most dear to them <i>before</i> the match burns out, or the whole thing won't work.
 Fresh Meat
 Every path in the world leads to meat. Nothing is more filling.
 The human world is a world of meat. The spirit is nothing more than twitching, trembling meat. Whoever denies meat will become extinct.
 Not as good as fresh meat, but better preserved. Tear it apart with your teeth; no forks or knives required.
 Smoked Meat
 Canned meat. Jerked meat. Smoked meat. Boiled meat. Beef, ham. The art of cooking meat is truly honored in the Town.
 Milk
 Warm, creamy. Satisfies hunger and thirst. Reminds me of childhood.
 Often used an an offering to the dead, milk serves as a reminder that all that is born must come to an end. It is said that the dead drink milk over water because the flow of water reminds them of the flow of time.
 Needle
 As piercing as a wise person's stare. Can be used to pick small locks, such as the ones in cabinet drawers.
 They say that when Lara Ravel pricked her finger with a needle, no blood was drawn, and she hasn't ever fallen asleep ever since.
 Ashen Swish
 Note
 Unfold to read the text.
 "I've found a spare key, but these key thefts (?) are becoming concerning. Your equipment is far from cheap, is it not? It would serve no one if it gets stolen.\n\nAnd do keep in mind that if our small arrangement is uncovered, I too will have to bear the consequences.\n\n-V. O."
 Package
 Contains unknown useful items. Unfold to extract them.
 Barter has a long history in our community. It has many styles, such as "tit for tat." Sometimes, people even blindly swap wrapped items.
 Different from my other medications. I need to test it on an infected person to see if it can cure the plague.
 Serum
 The liquid is thick and smells of soil. I brewed it from hot underground blood and a tincture.\n\n…Is this it?
 Pemmican
 A mixture of meat, fruit, and fat. Extremely filling, only slightly revolting.
 Pemmican isn't eaten for pleasure. This form preserves meat and fat, so that's how odonghs prepare it before venturing into the steppe for weeks to herd bulls.
 Pocket Watch
 Recently stopped. That means that the owner most likely died.
 Victor Kain never carries a watch around, but always knows the correct time, down to the second. We've tested him. Can he tell by the stars?
 "Shmowder"
 A box filled with a yellowish powder. Guess it's for some kind of game.
 Smells like medicine. A dangerous idea for a game. Destroying this would be the responsible thing to do.
 Raisins
 Once a juicy grape, now a small sweet that wouldn't satisfy an infant.
 If a train is late, first we run out of cookies, then chocolate, then candy. Only after that do children remember raisins.
 Revolver
 A six-chambered, military-grade revolver. Imprecise. Limited range.
 The civil war has gone on for more than two years. The hostility mostly passed our hellhole by, but refugees and deserters keep spreading military equipment to the furthest parts of the country.
 Ring
 It circles back, like time. Equally precious.
 "Ding-a-ding,\nHear the ring ring…"
 Safety Pin
 Both safe and unsafe at the same time.
 Murky the orphan says that safety pins are like people: open or closed, they always have a pointy end.
 Okay, I'm gonna explain how this works, and you're gonna listen.\nAll suspects get locked up while investigation is ongoing. That'll happen in the morning. You can scream, shout, run around in circles, bang on doors all you want—morning is when you get out, and not a moment sooner. You've got food and water. Now wait.
 I need to talk to the governor.
 If you need to, you will. In the morning.
 Listen, pal. Do you know who I am?
 I need to go to the toilet.
 I know you're lying. You don't need the bathroom. I can tell from your eyes. I'm a great judge of character.
 I really do.
 Look, you're obviously not an uncharitable man. Maybe you'd like a bit more in your pocket?
 Who wouldn't? But we can't take bribes. And you don't have anywhere near enough to make someone ignore their orders.
 How much would it take?
 I don't feel good… I think I'm having a stroke. I need a doctor…
 You can tie my hands if you don't trust me.
 Do you even get to sleep tonight?
 Do you think I'm stupid? I know what you're up to. It's called weaseling. You figure there must be a way out and you're trying to wind me up, find the right approach. Right?
 I'm not that kind of person.
 …Yeah. Want to give me a hint?
 Look. You aren't coming out of that cell a moment before the order's given. Period. Except under a shroud, maybe. The walls and door won't break down, so don't even try it. \nYou've got a cot; use it. You'll want to be refreshed tomorrow for the investigation.
 So what, Saburov's going to torture me?
 I don't have time to sleep, pal. I'm needed outside!
 My father is dead. And here you are…
 Turns out you're innocent. They got the culprit. Everyone else is free to go.
 They got the culprit? Who is it?
 Finally.
 They got the culprit? Where are they?
 You think anyone tells me that kind of thing? If someone's free to go, they aren't a suspect anymore. Right? So the culprit must have been caught. It's called logic.\nAlthough… maybe they weren't. Not my place to know. My orders were to let the big one go. The Master vouched for you.
 What Master?
 Fat Vlad. Vlad Olgimsky, that is. The big one. Vlad Senior. 
 All four of them? That's a rousing vote of confidence.
 I have no master.
 Okay. So long, pal.
 If you see a man, run. Men are angry today. They kill the likes of you and I.
 You think we have anything in common, odongh?
 Why are they so hateful?
 We're not human. We're different.
 You're a worm, true. But I am human all right.
 Unfortunately, I am made of flesh and blood. So I'll take your advice.
 Looking for a murderer. Turning into murderers themselves. This is how a town changes.
 What murderer? What does it have to do with me?
 I'll be cautious.
 You look like a murderer. Do not delve into the town's flesh in you want to live. Keep to the outskirts. Less people here.
 Thanks, Worm. Let Mother Boddho keep your footprints warm.
 I can't. I have business at the heart of the town.
 Oh my brothers, my brothers in spirits! Behold a man, head higher than the sky! Behold a creature of well-earned pride. Dare I trouble you, good sir, with trivial talk?
 Well?
 Great, a poet. Go ahead, I'm listening.
 God, no. Someone's on my tail.
 Oh, how ferocious Mother Nature is! For 'tis her wrath that must be borne. Oh friend, if only I could quench my thirst… I'd give heaven and earth for a sip of cold water!
 Drink from the river, then.
 Only brute beasts drink from the river. Us proud men deserve spring water. It is brought here in barrels, but they're too often empty. I would get it there, but I have no bottles. I'd drink from a fountain, but I might faint first… The air is far too heady.
 The air <i>is</i> heady here in September.
 You're literally next to a pub.
 The pub is closed, good sir, but even if it wasn't… What makes it open, really? One must ask oneself… And anyway, Stamatin the Curmudgeonly has introduced new rules, with another sort of liquid flowing. A fiery one. A good one, but not one I need at the moment… \nSo, do you have water?
 I don't. But the river is right there. You'll make it. I believe in you.
 Maybe I do.
 Yeah right. I didn't come halfway across the country to get you a drink from a barrel.
 You do actually seem about to faint. A stroke seems closer than the river.
 You're in luck. Have some of mine.
 Yeah… Tough to find good water around here.
 …H-how? Why? Curse this air, this mind-numbing odor… What do we do now?
 Did you do this?
 Nothing. There's nothing more to be done.
 Why did you do that to her?
 In the morning, people screamed about a steppe abomination, that it left no footprints and had bones for legs. \nBut now look: It's only a girl. A steppe girl, sure, but… alive.
 You're a brave soul… as befits Isidor's son, of course. It takes courage to claim your name today.
 I would never renounce my father. I have nothing to be ashamed of.
 Whatcha lookin' at? Get lost. We got him first.
 Who is he?
 Don'tcha see? Burakh the Turncoat! Isidor's son himself!
 …And what has he done?
 Just wait until someone gets you, too.
 Have you lost your mind? He has nothing to do with this.
 Take a good look at me. <i>I</i> am Isidor's son.
 The bastard put his own dad six feet under! So whatcha lookin' at? Get lost, or you're next!
 Pull it together, will you? Breathe. You're gonna pull a muscle—wouldn't be able to deliver justice, then…
 Oh yes he does! The whole Town's saying he did it.
 Done what? You idiots…
 …Right. Well, be careful not to take all this too far.
 I am Artemy Burakh, not this man. And I didn't kill my father.
 Any cracked ribs? Bones? Breathe in, out.
 Scalpel
 Either a weapon that can take someone's life, or an essential tool for a surgeon.
 A tool for a surgeon. A tool for a menkhu. A tool for a bandit. A tool for a ripper. A tool for me.
 Lockpick
 I can either cut someone with it, or use it to pick a door lock. Either way it will break after a couple of uses.
 It is taboo to cut flesh in the Town, but crafty people know how to bend the rules. These <i>lockpicks</i> can produce unbearably painful wounds. Perhaps breaking and entering is more ethical.
 Soap
 A bar of common soap.
 Nothing fancy, but soap is the best way to maintain hygiene. Essential.
 Spindle
 It's almost out of thread.
 Victoria Olgimskaya used to spin. Only for show, of course. What's there to spin when your husband slaughters bulls instead of herding sheep?
 Swevery
 Tourniquet
 Used to improve health. The townsfolk prefer locally made leather tourniquets over rubber ones.
 Alexander Saburov hoped to outlaw tourniquets in a desperate attempt to protect his Katerina from morphine addiction. What a silly idea. One can't just outlaw bands made out of rubber and leather.
 Walnuts
 Can be munched down—with little effect. The kids here would sell their souls for a handful.
 The game goes like this: find a nut that has traveled far, guess its name, shake it, and listen to stories from the soul trapped inside.\n\nThis originated with the Polyhedron. We didn't play it as kids.
 Water Bottle
 Quenches thirst. Serves as a base for tinctures. Water from the Gorkhon river is undrinkable.
 Fresh water is carried into the Town daily from steppe springs, then distributed by water bearers. The Gorkhon water has long been poisoned by the Factory pollution. It's dangerous to even touch.
 Spring
 A rusty metal spring. Useful to fix all kinds of tools.
 Industrialization granted the local workers new rights and fixed working hours. All it asked in return was their free will.
 Thimble
 Useless in a town that forbids sharp objects. Still good for sewing.
 Young ladies of good upbringing are often taught embroidery. But young Capella never uses a thimble. A Mistress must sense a needle's path; if she doesn't, she deserves the consequences.
 Thread
 Ties that which is torn; fates, if it's red.
 Serious surgery requires thread, but in the field there's often no time to sew together wounds. Bandages and tourniquets have to do.
 Trepanner
 Use to crack the skull for an operation or autopsy.
 This crude tool is frowned upon by some judgmental types. But they don't have to deal with the real epidemics, do they?
 Tweezers
 Useful to repair delicate equipment.
 Some kids sort their stamp collections with these; others tear wings off bugs.
 White Whip
 Plaguefinder
 A mysterious device that allows me to better see signs of sand pest.
 Disregard the how; <i>why</i> was this made at all? And by whom?
 And tomorrow, it'll be different somehow?
 Who knows. If we attack each other today, might as well grow wings tomorrow.
 Let me examine you. I'm a doctor.
 Didn't look like <i>you</i> attacked anyone.
 You're a true hero. Not because you defended me, but because you don't fear the truth. You can be trusted. 
 I don't like how pale you are. Let me dress your wound.
 Still, I'd like to dress your wound... if I had a bandage.
 I'm all right. They only hit me once or twice…
 Yeah. You'll live.
 Saved their strength for me.
 Seems the Burakh prophecy is true, huh? Each Burakh will spill a river of blood. Or drown the Town in blood, maybe—the wording varies. So it goes. So much death…
 Burakh? You mean Isidor?
 Have you seen much death?
 Of course. He may not have spilled it himself, but it's all happening because of him. Just as the prophecy foretold.
 Bullshit. Old wives' tales.
 Yes. We've never suffered this before—no, certainly not like this. Mark my words: the end is nigh. The Wormwood star rises in the night sky.
 Perhaps it is the end.
 Isidor has nothing to do with this. This is on you.
 None of this is my fault.
 A shabnak-adyg always steals the form of a woman, but that's mere illusion, broken the moment it starts to run. That's when you notice the legs, made of bone or clay. It leaves no trace behind. When it runs, the illusion dissolves, like a smell carried away on the wind.
 A shabnak-adyg is a myth! It's not real.
 You're chasing steppe demons, huh? A little seasonal lapse of sanity?
 Here's my method: If it doesn't have any brains, that means its head is made of clay. Take it right to the cemetery.
 You must be an outsider. If you'd lived here as long as I have, you'd sing a different tune. \nHere, the Earth is alive. It bears more than just crops. Sometimes, it spits out a horror so unfathomable, you spend the whole night sleeping in fits and starts. Clay and bones cultivate a beast. People don't kill other people around here—only a shabnak would do that.
 I'm a local.
 Right. The cemetery's where they come from. Lots of clay there, and bones.
 I was making fun of you, idiot.
 Then off to the cemetery you go! Say hello to the ghosts for me.
 So… Are they all finished over by the Stake? Trial complete?
 What stake?
 Everyone's losing their minds. Hell, they'll start looking for ghosts and bogeymen soon. Shabnaks don't exist. It's just the damned twyre blooming, making our heads swim.
 Agreed.
 Do you know who started the rumor?
 Anything is possible. I've met people who only looked human on the outside—deep down, they were vile beasts.
 Who could ever figure that out now?\n…You know, I swear I recognize your face. Who are you?
 I'm Artemy, Isidor Burakh's son. I have returned.
 Wrong, sister. You couldn't possibly know who I am.
 What trial?
 Did you hit your head somewhere, big guy? Or are you just stupid? They caught a man-eater at the Bone Stake Lot. A clay demon from the steppe! Look, I don't have time to catch up some random idiot.
 Wait, where's that lot?
 Holy hell. Your parents ever teach you any manners?
 What an idiot! I'd say you're an outsider, but you're dressed like a factory worker. That where you hit your head? The lot's in the Skinners.
 Got it. Maybe I'll take a look…
 Get out of here, kid, before I teach you some manners myself.
 Ah… So you are Burakh's heir?
 I am.
 Why do you ask?
 You're one of Olgimsky's men now, right? Big Vlad said anyone who touches you will be in for a world of hurt.
 What the hell?
 He's a complete stranger to me. And I don't need anyone to intercede on my behalf.
 No. I'm my own man. As is Olgimsky.
 It's unwise to get in his way. Boös is a powerful patron. Don't let him down.
 I'll stay on my toes.
 He wants to decide my fate behind my back? Good luck with that.
 Move along… or I'll scream!
 Why are you all so angry? Have I wronged you in some way?
 I'm going, I'm going… Just calm down.
 You're a cold-blooded murderer. You killed our protector. You're a walking clue, fella: bloody clothes, foreign face, and you stink like a railroad. Rumor has it, that's where the murderer hid.\nWere you trying to escape? Skip town?
 What protector? Who are you talking about?
 I only arrived several hours ago, woman.
 You know who. Move along, I said! I have nothing to talk to you about! And stop glaring, I'm not afraid of you. I'll scream!
 Why don't you, then? Go ahead.
 Shut up! Shut up, or <i>I'll</i> scream.
 You poor thing… We still think you're good.
 You feel sorry for me? You're an angel.
 We who?
 I do.
 Likewise.
 Well… Tata, Rubber, Filya, Tag, Cuckoo, Lelya, Ruffle… Also, Ruta and Tisha. And Capella only said good things about you.
 That's like a whole army. So I'm not alone.
 Tell them… tell them I'm grateful.
 You'll grow up into a good person.
 Tata brought kittens yesterday. Six. Do you want a kitten?
 Right, a kitten. Exactly what I need.
 I'm like a kitten myself. That's enough cats in my life.
 I'll think about it.
 На Пустыре Костного Столба происходит расправа над некой «людоедкой».
 Odongh
 Reflection
 Vigilante
 Kingfisher
 Prison Guard
 Lost One
 Er… Sorry! I didn't mean to.
 Who are you?
 I just… dropped by to warm myself up. I'm from the cannery. Canning stuff.
 What are you doing here?
 What were you playing?
 No idea. I just came to it, raised the lid… and it kinda just… happened.\nSo I'm a musician, huh? Weird.
 You played for the first time ever? That <i>is</i> weird.
 So you play piano.
 You're a savant, then. You should study music seriously. Leave for the Capital.
 Don't come closer. Or I'll scream.
 Who are you?
 I'm nearly screaming already.
 Who taught you this melody?
 How do you know this melody?
 This sweet melody is not your malady. What do you want?
 Nothing, really. I'm leaving.
 Don't piss me off, kid. Just tell me.
 I wrote it myself. Just now. Will you flick off? Eff off? And never come back?\nMother told me not to say "fuck off" to people, not directly.
 Play it one more time, will you?
 You sure are no sister of Capella's.
 Never coming back is a fate in store for all of us.
 You lying little punk. Your grimy fingers couldn't have created this melody.
 I need fifty clear-headed people armed with spades. A tall order, I know.\nSpades and common sense don't mix in your prehistoric dump of a town. Fifty spades I can manage, but gathering a dozen thinking men is impossible. Either that, or they can't dig. Like me.
 Why so many?
 I need to solve the problem of mass graves once and for all.\nOh, and we need to choose which part of the Town to designate as the new graveyard. Because the old one currently refuses to entertain new guests.
 Refuses to entertain new guests? What do you mean?
 Do you know who manages the graveyard? A minor. The cretins Saburov assigned to be my helpers—<i>my helpers,</i> I'd like to emphasize, subordinates—stopped working because something is bothering the girl. \nI'm starting to think that brain atrophy is what's really killing this town.
 I know her. Her name is Grace.
 A man of vision, then. Way to go, emshen.
 What's bothering her?
 I really couldn't care less. What matters is that right now, we lack a place to bury the dead. Thoughts? You are, after all, a local.
 Cremation?
 Spot on, Burakh.\nIf the morning report can be believed, the factory furnaces are spacious enough to solve our little problem. But the locals refuse to burn the dead. And if we generously call their babbling an "argument," it always boils down to referencing that deranged girl.
 Look, I can't make heads or tails of what you want from <i>me.</i>
 I'll see what I can do.
 
 
 A deadly disease is devouring my town. We have no experienced doctors.\n\nWhat shall we do?
 
 
 Sometimes, a melody can be heard in ordinary houses that only Victoria Olgimskaya and her daughter knew.\n\nIf I find the mysterious musician, I can tell Capella about them.
 
 
 A random worker had been playing Victoria's melody, even though he had no music skills. Could it have really been a spirit? Or is there another answer?
 
 
 Some girl had been playing Victoria's melody. Did she overhear it and decide to prank Capella? Or is there another answer?
 
 
 Clara the Changeling had been playing Victoria's melody. There's no more Victoria. What do I tell Capella?
 
 
 Capella will no longer trick herself into the belief that souls are immortal, or at least the soul of her mother.
 Now Capella knows that there's still hope. Perhaps her mother Victoria still lives… in a way.
 What do you mean? Don't you dare! No one can replace me!
 Why, exactly?
 No one else knows how to care for them. No one else knows how to listen. No one else will whisper them kind words!\nEach of them is like kin to me. I feel them listening to my lullabies…
 Fair enough. You're irreplaceable.
 What do you want to hear, human?
 How many dead do you think are down there?
 More than I would like. Any other questions?
 Is it possible to… relocate some of them somewhere else?
 I have a name, you know.
 Two names. Maybe more. Two for certain. I do not care. What do you want?
 I want to move the dead from the graveyard, but there's no place for them.
 Nothing. I don't like you.
 It can be arranged. It would be my pleasure. Should I make it less crowded?
 Do the dead keep living underground? Or did Grace dream that up?
 She didn't.
 How do I stop the screaming?
 The graveyard is crowded.
 Very much so.
 Can anything be done about it?
 Arrange it, then.
 No, wait. I don't like the way you just licked your snout.
 One moment… Another… Oh, so many of them. So many, indeed.\nThat's it. All done.
 What exactly did you do?
 What, is that it?
 I solved your problem. Got what you came for? You did.
 I'm not dropping this. What did you do?
 Whoever laid right of me, better to not think of them. But those to the left, they are fine now. Do you understand me, human? Go, human.
 I didn't understand any of that.
 I'll check.
 I understand.
 …Did you gobble them up, or something?
 It's quieter…
 Well, are you happy now?
 Have they stopped screaming?
 They are scared. I feel like something terrible has happened. But I don't understand… they're silent. They stopped talking to me.
 But they have enough space now. That's what matters.
 Do you know about a creature that lives underground? Looks like a rat?
 There are no creatures underground. Only the earth, and the dead becoming earth. The earth and the dead are the same. Connected through their shared life.
 Thought so.
 It seems I've made a mistake…
 I refuse to burn corpses in the Factory's furnaces. 'Tis not God's way. A hock? Sure. A sausage? Be my guest. Leather to dry? I'm all for it.\nBut a person…
 Not a person. A corpse.
 Mr. Big-City Dandy wants us to burn corpses in the furnaces. He can burn or boil 'em back where he's from, but here, we don't burn our dead. I'm the master of furnaces, and that's what I'm telling you.
 Master of furnaces?
 Sabotage, then?
 Sabotage it is. We're not steppe beasts. We're civilized folk here. We have respect for the dead.\nYou see it our way, don't you? You're with us, with the people?
 So you refuse to burn corpses?
 That's what I'm telling you.
 You will burn the dead. If you won't, you'll die because of it.
 No. I'm always on my own.
 With <i>my</i> people. I'm one of those steppe beasts, in case you wondered.
 Huh. Meaning?
 Meaning you'll burn the dead. End of discussion.
 Like anyone's asking you.
 It's bad to leave the dead lying around. Corpses spread the plague, see? It spreads through the earth too. Flies carry it, for example.
 We have a graveyard. Dumping them into pits. Saw that, didn't you? Means city suit gave the order. Means it's all good.
 …No. I really don't think it's all good.
 Not for us to decide.
 Whatever you say.
 Oh, what have you done… What have you done!
 I do pity your dead. But I tend to the living. They're more important.
 Forgive me.
 No. It's the dead who are important. The living can take care of themselves. The dead can't.
 I'm sorry.
 Don't come here anymore. I don't want to see you… for some time.
 Okay. Whatever you say.
 Maybe I can make it up to you.
 Ugh, the little rat is crying. Will you help me carry it? Just remember it's mine. I found it.
 What are you doing here?
 Hunting.
 What, like rats?
 What did you find?
 Show me your hands, hunter.
 An order came from the Sandbox. Anyone who saves a baby from a plague house gets their sins absolved. Easy, right?\nIf only you saw how many bastards were brought. But I have a witness now! Perfect! Can you help me carry it?
 So, we're baby hunting. And how goes the hunt?
 I don't want to touch it, you see. First of all, it's crying. Second, it stinks. But the crying's enough. I hate noise, I just hate it. Especially this kind of noise.
 I see you're no fan of babies.
 Won't you be a mother someday? Keep practicing.
 What "sandbox"?
 Are you from another planet? The Town Hall.
 Are you considering adoption?
 Are you mad? Look, I adore children, just not so much <i>touching</i> them. I thought I could bear it, but… ugh.\nSo, will you help me carry it or not?
 You're shaking like a vampire around garlic! It won't bite you.
 Fine, I'll carry it. Just stay out of my way. You don't deserve absolution.
 This is <i>utterly</i> unfair! I walked into a plague house! I showed courage! This is what they promised to reward, not <i>touching</i> them!
 I told you: I'll carry the baby. You go home. And don't you ever do this again.
 Fine. You deal with the little beast.
 You've heard that bitch, surely? She's saying the child's no orphan, that it's hers! Oh <i>please,</i> it's ridiculous!
 And what are you doing here, blackbird?
 You're not the type to just give up.
 So you've finally acquired a taste for newborns?
 Why are you mad at me? I'm no shabnak. I'm a poor performer trying to help. And yet you snarl at me the way a bear would a hunter!\nWhat if I have my own history with children, hm? A debt I must pay?
 Yeah, yeah, whatever. You're not taking them to the Town Hall, are you?
 I'm taking them somewhere safe. You think this is better?\nYou're not my confessor! You have blood on your hands, ripper. You shouldn't be around kids!
 I'm no ripper! I'm a physician.
 Okay, stop yelling! Give us a break.
 Where are you taking them? Answer me, you ghoul! To Var? The herbalists? Tell me before I tear off your head!
 To good people! They make drugs out of them in the Sandbox, I think. No one knows what happens to them next, though.
 "Good people," you say?
 This is madness…
 Good, kind people. I've said all I can, and won't tell you anything else.
 You know I'll figure it out anyway.
 Well, I won't try to beat it out of you. What if you start singing?
 Yargachin, calm this witch down. She is up to no good.
 Is it your baby?
 And you, why are you here?
 They signed an order. We are to go door to door and search for the helpless. Especially infants. Whoever brings a baby from a plague house to the Town Hall will be pardoned.
 Are you guilty of something?
 "Yargachin"? Not me, I'm not one of your butchers.
 It is a sign of respect. No one is wiser than a yargachin, one who follows the Lines with his knife.
 Fine. So what's going on here?
 And who are you?
 Why haven't I heard of this?
 My husband killed a woman on the first day of the outbreak. She was no shabnak. Now he awaits execution in the town jail.\nI would redeem him, yargachin. A life for a life.
 It is mine, yargachin. My child.
 It's not true, basaghan. Why are you lying? I can see it.
 Look at her face, she's a steppe woman! Do you know what they do to their babies? They turn them into soap! Everyone knows it!
 Yeah, that's a… well-known fact.
 Exactly, she's a steppe woman, so I trust her more than you. So be quiet and let me talk to her.
 So, what have you decided?
 Take it. I trust <i>you</i> more.
 I think neither of you is entirely honest. I'd rather take the baby to the Town Hall myself.
 Well? Are you convinced now?
 Okay, okay. Take it to these "good people" of yours. Try not to drop it.
 Stop arguing. I'll take the baby to the Town Hall myself.
 You know, I received a little business proposition today. The whole job stinks, but us beggars can't be choosers, eh?
 Tell me more.
 Sure, whatever.
 Don't even think about it. I need you here.
 The job is hiding stiffs. The townsfolk are afraid to surrender their dead.
 How do you even hide a corpse?
 Why?
 First off, the houses people died in get quarantined and boarded up… with people still inside. Damkovsky's orders. \nSecondly, there's no space left at the graveyard, so bodies get burned. The townsfolk are not too keen on that. Grace must be really worried.
 So what?
 Wipe your nose.
 Anyway, people need to hide corpses. Stench becomes an issue quick. It's the smell that gives them away. Can't put them in the icebox, after all.
 Spill it, already! What's the job?
 Yeah, I know about the graveyard problem.
 It's "Dankovsky."
 Damn-kovsky. He thinks he's the only person in the Town who knows which end of a spoon goes into your mouth. \nWhatever he says, people rush to obey it. Even boös bows to him. And the Kains adore him.
 So what?
 Maybe I should wear a bowtie too, while I'm at it?
 Don't get sassy. Tell me more about this corpse thing.
 So, there's a chemist in the Atrium. He whipped up some sort of concoction that prevents decay. Gathered some guys, around fifty, maybe more… Now they go around at night and empalm stiffs.
 And that's the job you were offered?
 Where do they hide them, then…?
 "Embalm."
 Yup. Plenty of guys willing to do anything for quick coin these days. Me included. They hinted they wanted me to recruit you, too. Inconspicuously.
 Inconspicuous is your middle name.
 That's… well, there's more I'd say if you were older, but that's just slow suicide!
 Why? They're empalmed and everything.
 Where is this madness taking place?
 So what are you going to do?
 This sounds like the kind of mess Dankovsky should handle.
 All around town. They work at night, quietly. Nobody'll catch them in the act.
 As if I don't have enough on my plate already.
 I guess you're right…
 I'm going to have a little chat with that chemist of yours. Go ahead and accept the offer, because I'm gonna need a witness after this.
 Leaving corpses indoors is out of the question. I've got to put an end to this.
 Oh, I'd love to see that, believe me.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Something's wrong with this shop.
 This shop has been turned into a shrine.
 I know not, yargachin. Why would you? You're a respected man, your father's son. You're guiltless. Why bother you?\nYou have your own affairs to manage. They say you are looking for a cure. They say, "He's up all night, he's getting close."
 That is true.
 That's not true.
 It is good that you don't give up hope.
 You are a brave woman, basaghan.
 The likes of you and me are few and far between. This work is dangerous. This disease is dangerous. People like this woman are dangerous. She should be killed, yargachin.
 It's up to me what I to do.
 She's just like you.
 This is foolish. He'll be released, but you'll get sick and die. How does that help anyone?
 You! You brought new bodies, didn't you? Please, enough. Stop bringing them here. There's so many of them, I can barely hear…
 Grace, this is a graveyard. This is where the dead belong.
 The earth is cramped. No more space. They trample each other, they wail!
 They don't care anymore, kid.
 No! They care! They feel! And there's no peace for them now.\nThat's all they need: consolation and peace. There is no one more miserable, more helpless than the dead—can't you see that?
 You're imagining things, Grace.
 Imagine fifty people crammed into this room. You can't bend your knees, can't turn, can't scratch your back, can't even shrug. And it lasts for <i>days.</i> How would you feel? It's torture!
 They feel nothing, kid. They're dead.
 No, doctor! You don't believe me, do you? Go and listen! Go listen to those huge graves—they dump people there by the dozen!
 There, there… Don't cry.
 Perhaps, but the living are more important.
 Not really a suitable job for a young girl…
 Capella
 You are Artemy Burakh. Greetings.
 Greetings to you, too. Are you Olgimsky's daughter?
 You know my name?
 I can <i>see.</i> I haven't yet mastered the art, but… I do see things, sometimes. It's a gift I inherited from my dear mother.
 You haven't mastered the art of… sight?
 Are you talking about clairvoyance, or what?
 Yes. My name is Victoria, but friends call me Capella.
 Well, are we friends?
 Yes.
 Really? How did you figure it out so fast?
 I mean… It's hard to explain. Sometimes I know what a person will say, before they say it. Or I imagine a situation, and the next day it unfolds exactly how it was in my head. \nSometimes I even know past events I wasn't present for, like which drawer Father put papers into years ago.
 A powerful gift, if you're telling the truth.
 Not that powerful, not with me. Not like my mother. She could see at will, although even with her, it could be fickle.\nI only see rarely, and I don't control it at all.
 I see, I see.
 I'd like such a gift, myself.
 Mother said it would pass. I'll either see by my own will, or lose it entirely.
 …Or you'll start seeing ghosts and unicorns.
 Better to lose it, then.
 Your undue sarcasm has been noted. It's not so rare a gift in this town. There were once several women who could see. Mother. Nina Kaina. Katerina Saburova, perhaps. Outsiders arrive with such skepticism, but they are always soon astonished.
 Astonish me, then.
 So it's common? One weirdo already told me I'll—
 —drown the town in blood.
 You two swap notes, or what?
 You likely aren't afraid of blood. Right?
 Of course not. I'm a surgeon.
 I absolutely am. Who isn't?
 Do you know what I see? Under your feet, the hard soil acts as though spring melt, each step forming an imprint filled with red. You leave pools of clotted blood in your wake, Artemy Burakh. \nI thought this must be about the murders, but you are no murderer. What does it all mean?
 You're asking me? I have no idea.
 All bullshit. You have some imagination.
 Why have you come? Are you looking for my brother, perhaps? Or do you want me to ask something of my father?
 I need nothing. I sense sadness in your eyes. Have you been crying?
 Do people often come to you as an in-between for Big Vlad?
 Your brother? Why would I?
 Oh… our family is falling apart. Father and Brother argue all the time, louder and crueler with each passing day. \nBrother is angry with me… Everything went awry after Mother's death.
 She was holding the family together, huh?
 Everyone loved your mother. I was just a kid, but I remember her, too.
 Why is your brother angry with you?
 She died when I was six. On the day of her funeral, I locked myself in with the coffin, so that no one could take her away from me. \nThat evening, Brother explained there was no other way: The dead must be buried. That is best for them, he said. And then I understood.
 They do need it.
 But how did your brother make you sad?
 How many years have passed? Nine, almost. Still I walk the house as though she's here. I leave out the last piece of pie. Looking out windows, I move aside so that she, too, can see. I even fold the corner of her bed.
 You need a doctor. All this sounds unhealthy.
 You need to let go of the dead, kid.
 To me, she's not dead. If I don't think of her that way, we stay together.
 Are you sure she would want this?
 You speak with such pain because of your father's death. I'm sorry… I truly mean that.
 All right. Let us leave our dearly departed in peace.
 Yes. Father pays heed to what I ask of him. Tells me I'm the only person he loves. That's because I take after Mother.
 My condolences.
 I thought he loved no one.
 Brother acts against Father's will. Your Kin make up most of Father's workforce. But he… he doesn't treat them well. \nSo Brother argues with him, but Father hates to be challenged. He says he'll disinherit my brother.
 …Making you the heiress. Right?
 Where's your brother now? I'd like to meet him.
 I don't know. He seems to do business with everyone. Knows everything. \nAs for the family business, he… well… deals with steppe people. That's why Father is often angry with him.
 Why would he be angry about that?
 Wrong! Mother never wanted that, and Father honors her will. Still does…
 Another family torn apart. Your brother… Is he home?
 I think he's in the Broken Heart now. In the Earth district. Actually, he frequents the place… ever since Mother died.
 I see.
 Did something happen? You look worried.
 I want to ask you something.
 What? Have you had more nightmares about me?
 No. I told you, it doesn't happen often. Once a month, maybe, or every few months.
 Did you know my father well? Did you talk much?
 Yes. Of course.
 He wrote this note… Here, take a look. Why are these names listed together? Yours is on here, too.
 Go ahead.
 He wrote this note… Here, take a look. Why are these names listed together? Yours is on here, too.
 …I don't know, but I have a suspicion.
 Why are you frowning? Is it something bad?
 Are you all going to die soon?
 Were you his patients?
 …It's not about money, is it?
 Well, no. About a year ago, your father began to seek our company. We all met together, sometimes, or in twos or threes. It happened naturally.\nHe… taught us, I suppose, but not anything special. I think it was more about passing down something… something of great importance.
 I can't make heads or tails of what you're saying.
 You're an outsider. It's difficult to explain. We kids have our own town within the Town. A separate one. And we govern it on our own.\nDon't give me that patronizing look! It's not some game. You… you wouldn't understand anyway!
 Go on, please. I'll do my best.
 I grew up here. I knew all this before you learned the alphabet.
 Fine. Do you want to know why your father spent time with us, or not?
 Yes, I do.
 Your father was… shrewd. "He can see beneath crude earth, petty lies, and hard truths," Khan used to say. Khan didn't like him much, but even he got out of the Polyhedron to talk to him…\nHe believed we were the ones who would remake this town. Rebuild and conduct it. In the future.
 "Remake"? You mean destroying this town?
 A fisher of men. Never know he had that in him.
 "Conduct" the town? Did you mean "govern," or what?
 No. A town is like music. You must play, writing the composition as you go, all while minding the harmony. Are you a musical person?
 I am. Well, I love it, at least.
 Unfortunately, I'm not.
 I don't know. Perhaps it doesn't need to be so drastic. Although… the more I think about it, the more disturbing it sounds. Perhaps there is a catastrophe upon us? Rumor has it, the war moves eastward. And it won't end… Perhaps something is about to happen? God forbid, of course.
 Do you even believe in God?
 Everything ends, sooner or later. So will the war.
 That's what he was preparing us for. Changing the Town. I can see it now.\nHe taught each of us something important. Perhaps… perhaps he gave a piece of himself to us. Yes. That must be what he did.
 Well. Guess I'll keep an eye on you all.
 Oh, Dad. "I shall not wholly vanish, no." Always the sly fox…
 Guess I'll have to protect you from all evils, then.
 No, I don't. What about you?
 Wow. You didn't even hesitate.
 Neither do I.
 Girls your age usually say, oh, I believe there's <i>some</i> higher power.
 Guests are always welcome here.
 Why do you live here and not the Tower across the river?
 I see you're not in the mood for guests right now.
 The Tower of Orphans? It's not for me. I hate it.
 So that's what you call it?
 Why?
 That's not how one builds a kingdom. \nKingdoms are built on love and care. Be generous with those, and where you are, there a kingdom will gather.
 Does the Tower interfere with that, somehow?
 It separates children from their parents. Breaks families. Tears connections. \nWhen connections are torn, life cannot thrive. Does a leg thrive with cut veins? Do mushrooms thrive when torn from mycelium?
 I know. This is the steppe teaching of the Lines.
 First off, that's not how mycelium works.
 Perhaps… What I mean is, that tower is about tearing things apart. That's what the Kains built it for. They believe fractures are good for the soul.\nI think otherwise. That tower is the root of many evils.
 Such as?
 Huh. I kind of like it.
 No one knows what goes on there. I can hear the tune of the rat-catcher, his vibrations calling, luring, but I don't know what he desires.\nYou know, surely, the initiative to collect infants came from the Polyhedron? That they won't let in adults?
 You mean they <i>suggested</i> it, right? It's not like they can order around Saburov.
 Why won't they let in adults?
 Orders aren't needed. An idea only needs to take shape… That's how it always works with the Kains.\nVictor is too lenient with Khan, especially after Sinister Nina died. Khan is his beloved son, after all. The Kains' main heir, the family's hope.
 I see.
 Shame they're not too eager to see me.
 They just don't.\nSee, this is how the Tower works. Everyone just knows the adults aren't allowed. No one questions it, no one even bothers to gossip about it. That's the way things are, and everyone accepts it. And then, when their children are torn away from them, they shed tears.
 Sounds odd.
 That's just the kind of town we live in.
 Changeling
 What do you want, Ripper? Are you trying to catch the White Mistress, too? \nIt's futile, Burakh. She won't help anyone anymore. Won't save anyone.
 Why are you here?
 Was that you playing?
 I'm running the same errand you are. Looking for Mother Victoria. And getting paid handsomely for it, by the way. Are you? I am.\nSo here I am, playing. Perhaps someone will respond. But it's futile. No one does. Well, you did, but what use do I have for a moron like you?
 So it wasn't her soul…
 …So there is no afterlife. Not even in this form.
 So it wasn't.
 …So there's no White Mistress anymore?
 That's what I thought.
 So there isn't. In any shape or form. Did you really hope for something different?
 …Is there an immortal soul?
 I guess I did.
 Perhaps there is. But I doubt it.
 I thought you'd know for sure.
 And they call you kind… a saint, even.
 Perhaps I do. Do you really want to?\nYou don't. Live with hope, Burakh. It's more comforting that way.
 Fair enough.
 I'll relay this to Capella.
 Just… don't you dare tell Capella that. Or I'll snap your neck.
 
 
 I have the key to my home now.
 
 
 I have a key to a secret Factory building. Handy. I can't always sleep at other people's places, after all.
 
 
 Olgimsky's son, Vlad Jr., had granted my father access to a secret room below one of the Factory buildings. I feel it will become my new home.
 The poor orphan took the rustling of herbs for the voices of the dead. \n\nI don't have it in me to even get mad. But I do have a pocketful of herbs now.
 
 
 The contraption in the Lair can be used to produce herbal tinctures.
 Listen, Burakh. I'm in trouble. I was cursed yesterday.
 Well, what do I have to do with it?
 I'm surprised it only happened yesterday.
 This is the doing of your steppe butchers. Your rippers. You're a ripper. So you must know how to undo it.
 Undo what?
 Butchers don't curse anyone.
 I'm not a "ripper."
 There's a man around town who can divine the future by reading entrails. A steppe haruspex. He dissects the dead… or dying… and tells the future.\nThey say he's always right. Got a ton of clients. And… well, here we are.
 So is it the dead or dying?
 "Here" where?
 Why the fuck should you care? There's no salvation from the sand pest! They're all walking corpses, anyway.\nThis way, at least, they serve the living.
 And the living in question would be you, yes?
 So I called upon his services. There was this… thing… that I really, very much needed to know.\nAnd now I've got this… heart. I've tried to throw it away, drown it in the Gullet <i>and</i> the Guzzle, bury it…\nBut it always comes back! I keep finding it in my bag, or in my bed, or in my pocket. I just thrust my hand there, and, and…
 Ah… I know this curse. It happened to me when I was a kid, too.
 Get lost.
 I think you ought to share this with the changeling girl. Sounds like her area of expertise.
 Burakh, it only happened because that… cutter, I mean, your colleague, wasn't a <i>true</i> haruspex. He didn't actually know those Lines of yours. Or so I am told!\nBut you do! Help me, Burakh, please! I promise I'll be good from now on!
 Will you?
 Piss off.
 I am good, Burakh! I had no idea he'd kill someone! Please! I'm basically on my knees here!
 Fine. Shut up. This heart of yours can't be thrown away. Only traded. Do you have it on you?
 Yes.
 Hold it in your hand tightly. Close your eyes. What do you see?
 I have no idea how to deal with this.
 Good, huh? Yeah, you're Changeling material.
 I see… my beautiful face… no, wait. I see a spindle of sorts.
 Fine. If I find a spindle, I'll trade it to you.
 Here you go. And never do that again.
 But what did you want to know?
 Whether I'll survive.
 Ah, well, that I can tell you for free: outlook not so good.
 You? Oh, you will. Everyone else may drop dead, but the likes of you always weasel their way through.
 What chemist?
 Hell if I know. Haven't met him yet. But it's not like there are ten different pharmacies in the Atrium, anyway.
 What's the job? Working with dead bodies?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Is it urgent?
 Your chemist provides services to people who don't want to bury their dead.
 What do you Kains want?
 My chemist? We don't have a chemist.
 He embalms dead bodies. Turns houses into tombs.
 Same as everyone. To curb the outbreak and get on with our lives. To turn this town into the best place on earth. \nAnything else I can help you with?
 No. Goodbye.
 It's just you all pursue such strange things.
 Then why does your chemist help spread the disease?
 Your father has been arguing with my older brother about it for years. Now is not the time to follow their example. We have more urgent business.
 Agreed. It would be nice to rein in your overly zealous chemist, for example.
 He says you endorse his actions. Living people are sharing their homes with the dead now. Are you happy?
 …If I'd learned about this earlier, I would have torn his head off already.\nNow give me thirty-five seconds of silence, please. I need to think.
 …
 Thank the gods… I almost believed it.
 Me too.
 The Cemetery is overcrowded… I see. The caretaker girl forbids mass graves, and stirs unrest… Yes. I've received these reports. People hide their dead to avoid having them burned… Corpses multiply in living rooms… Does the infection linger in dead bodies?
 Possibly.
 Most likely.
 I don't know. I'm a surgeon.
 How will you go about the search?
 You can tell a house where dead bodies are hidden by the sound.
 You poor, poor house… In a way, your kind are like teeth. You know how they pull teeth out? Sometimes, a dead tooth can be left in place. Other times, it needs immediate extraction.\nDo you think this one needs…?
 What are you doing here, pretty girl?
 Did you come to mark this house?
 Well, now I'll have to.
 What happened here?
 When the cough started, they began avoiding me. And then they locked me here alone! Yes, I'm sick, but not with this terrible plague! It's just a cold! Flu, maybe… Go ahead and examine me!\nJust… no quarantine, please! And don't mark this house!
 Don't you know? New order. Quarantine. Forbidden for people to go outside. Yet here we are… Our neighbors want to hide this from the authorities. They're afraid of the quarantine. Terrified, even.
 You can go outside. No one will stop you.
 Why did they lock you up?
 I'm sorry.
 They must have their reasons.
 I'm not a digger, either. I'm a surgeon.
 Digging is not exactly popular here. Living earth cult. Nothing but the graveyard will do.
 You said it yourself, emshen. A new graveyard right in the middle of town. Quite a story for you to tell back at the Capital.
 Very funny, Burakh. But enough joking… Now I have to really think about solving this issue.
 Burn the corpses.
 Stop the epidemic. That solves everything.
 How about letting the tenants back in and asking them?
 I remember when you were just a kid. Who could have thought you'd grow into… <i>this?</i>
 Don't "pretty girl" me, you peasant. Shoo! Wait outside until I finish.\nIt won't take long now. This house is inessential and ugly. I'm crossing it off.
 What is that supposed to mean?
 So the cross on the door is your doing?
 I'm not talking to you, <i>cocoon man.</i>\nDon't get mad at me, dear house, but you have to go. It's not the people who need curing, but the Town itself. Too much filler. That's the cause of the outbreak. Oh, house… If you're still alive, if you still hear me, I sincerely hope you'll understand.
 So you're planning to demolish this house? On what grounds?
 Victor harshly punishes anyone who interferes with the sanitary procedures.
 "Cocoon man"?
 Well, you're no butterfly, are you? No wings. No color. No imagination.
 But you've got all that in spades. Enough of your games.
 Get a load of this, dear house! This man must be a complete fool. He thinks I follow anyone's rules.\n…But you can't hear me, can you? You're unwanted. Unliving. So I hereby sentence you to emptiness. I'm sorry.
 I'm sorry, too, but I <i>will</i> put an end to what you're doing.
 On the grounds that I hate it. Be so kind as to shut your trap. Your coarse voice distracts me. Your hideous smell troubles me.\nYour smell… Blood, formaldehyde, iron, as expected. Steppe herbs, surprise, wrath… Oh, would you look at that! This beast is getting angry!
 You clearly weren't spanked enough as a child. That can be fixed.
 As will your father.
 I think you meant "goon," not "cocoon." The former fits me better. Get out.
 Truly your mother's daughter.
 Yes, pretty girl, you must obey the rules. You'll learn that soon enough.
 Not really. Just here to catch my breath.
 Is it urgent?
 Your daughter is out of control. She's marking houses with crosses on a whim.
 Not really. Just here to catch my breath.
 I'll put a stop to that.
 She doesn't believe you will.
 Good, that's all I wanted to hear.
 She's struggling with our family's tragedy. Maria took Simon's death very much to heart. She believes it put new responsibilities on her. How did she explain her actions?
 I'm not sure. She was talking to the house.
 Responsibility…?
 She believes that the time has come for her to replace her mother. \nI don't suppose you remember Nina well, but she was the heart of this town. Its author. Its spirit. Its power. She could breathe life into inanimate objects. Literally. Do you know what I'm talking about?
 Not really.
 I do.
 Maria sees… meaningful dreams. We never ignore them. But she doesn't yet know how to interpret them. She takes valuable information and draws incorrect conclusions.\nDid she tell you that the Town itself is causing the outbreak?
 She said it has a lot of filler.
 She said houses are living beings.
 And you most assuredly do not agree. You take it for the wild fantasies of an unbalanced girl. Yet I am positive there is a grain of truth to her thinking, and you will soon bear witness to that.\nBut let's set this aside. I will put a stop to her.
 My job was to warn you. The rest is up to you.
 Don't be too harsh on her.
 People were scared of Nina, that much I remember.
 I have no intention to debate my wife with you. Is that clear?
 Sorry.
 Oh, in no uncertain terms.
 
 An epidemic, Burakh… Plague. And if it's the sand plague that smothered three hundred of my workers five years ago, then it's serious… very serious, my boy. Your father saved us back then. \nBut now… now I need you… at hand. Do I make myself clear?
 What's going on here?
 Clear as day. A family doctor. A tame doctor. Right?
 What epidemic?
 You know, Burakh… In olden days, pirates used to hunt ships that carried doctors… because they were worth more than gold. Imagine that! \nAnd I'm a bit of an old pirate myself… heh heh. Be prudent, my boy. Surely you appreciate your… value… now.
 I sure do. So unfortunately I will have to decline, boös. I have my own business to attend to.
 I'm not your boy, boös.
 I will help your family, boös—if you can help mine.
 You don't understand yet… You're a bull-headed, stubborn young man. But you will. When a three-body-thick pile of corpses lies atop Isidor's… maybe we will talk again.
 Who is going to be in charge now?
 That's of no concern to you, Burakh. Everything important that could be done… I've done already. \nThere will be a Fund. There will be a headquarters… intrigues… sleepless nights. Everyone here thinks they're crucial to defeating the outbreak… but they're scared. Mistaken. What can they tell you?
 I'm a doctor. I need the full picture.
 Sand plague. Sand pest, as we called it back then. Lethal… Everyone who got sick died. No survivors. And contagious, Burakh… Very much so.
 How do you know it's the same thing?
 Perhaps it will pass.
 Is this a medical meeting? Why wasn't I invited?
 So you have some time on your hands? Then go to each of them… Talk to one, two, three people… Fill your head with minutiae. While time… time is running out. Your time! \nSeven empty conversations… You don't need them. I can tell you all you need to know.
 That's all right, I'll manage. An hour of talking is fine. Let me in.
 It's your fault. You should have invited me from the start.
 Fair enough. I'm not big on chatter. What do I need to know?
 We have four doctors. Well… three, you excluded. They'll work on the epidemic. The headquarters will be here. All your actions… I mean, their actions… will be accounted for and rewarded by the Anti-Epidemic Fund. \nI like incentivizing… entrepreneurship. If you work well, you are paid well. So rest assured, they won't sit on their hands.
 Me excluded? Why?
 I have my own plans for you.
 Fair enough. You can count on me, boös.
 Got it.
 Nice. I happen to be out of cash.
 Let me make myself clear: In this war, I'm on the frontlines. Got it?
 But I have mine.
 Fear tightly grips my master, sir. He wishes, as you so frightf'ly know, to keep you close at hand, so that you may be near his children. 'Tis just in case. But we know it won't help: No one can cure the sand plague.
 Your master can rot for all I care.
 Father could do it, I think.
 What should I do, Reflection?
 Burakh, I reckon… It will be you who saves us from this pest. Who saves those who survive to witness your triumph. Your name's Burakh; so I know you'll wear out your fingers working. By the by, mind the fund he spoke of earlier… You should know how it works.
 Speak, Reflection.
 I don't care. I refused my legacy.
 A doctor like yourself is paid each night with some fair sum we take from the Pest Fund. Whether our Master likes or loathes you. He is, indeed, a man whose word is bond. Stay at the lump or not: The Fund will pay you for your deeds.
 That's nice to hear.
 But money is depreciating as we speak…
 How will he know of my actions?
 The Fund is not cared for purely by Master. All hands in town have staked on its success. You doctors will be watched closely…
 I always dreaded notoriety.
 Inflation will be tallied up with care. There's yet plenty of heft to Master's purse, and more gold yet from Kains and Saburovs: They share in the Bull Enterprise.
 I know.
 I don't need attention. At all.
 The founders of the Fund will find all faults; count up your deeds each night. The more you work the more you make… in hospital or street. Though I know not what they expect of you; mayhaps neither do they. Are you certain you wish to talk to them?
 Not at all. Too much rambling for one evening…
 Really?
 Yes. I can't stand being ignored.
 
 
 One of Notkin's boys is in trouble. If left unattended, he won't live to see the evening.
 
 
 
 
 
 Diagnostics is the father of treatment. To learn which antibiotic might help Patches, I first need to figure out which of his three Layers is sick.
 
 
 I made a herbal immune booster with father's contraption. This remedy can also be used to diagnose various internal issues in other people.
 
 
 My treatment helped Patches.
 
 
 I think it's time to pay a visit to the Lair.
 I came into my legacy. I traced Father's path and learned the voices of herbs. I entered his secret house and learned his craft. I will take care of his patients. I've proven by deeds that I know the Lines.\n\nI am a menkhu.
 
 
 There was a list of… patients, maybe?… in Father's vessel thing. These look like children's nicknames.\n\n1. Sticky\n2. Capella\n3. Murky\n4. Notkin\n5. Khan\n6. Grace\n7. Taya Tycheek\n8. [unfamiliar steppe sigil]
 
 
 Capella has created a union of kids. She might know what Father wanted with them.
 Father believed that the future of this town lies with its children and that each will improve it in their own way. Guess I should keep an eye on them in the future.
 
 Father believed that the children on his list are the key to the Town's future. Guess I should keep an eye on them in the future.
 The three ruling families will recruit volunteers to observe order. The dangerous districts will be cordoned off. Entry or exit will not be possible. Any crime against health or property will be punished immediately.
 What does that mean for me?
 Makes sense.
 You're a doctor, so you have privilege. Unlike others, you are allowed entry—and more importantly, exit—from infected areas. \nWe rely on your responsibility. If you discover you're infected, you won't attempt to conceal or spread it. Correct?
 Yes.
 If only it could be figured out at once…
 The hospital will be set up in the Theatre. Possible infected will be examined there every day. The disease will be studied, and we'll even try curing it. \nThey say there's no cure for the sand pest, but Doctor Dankovsky still has hope.
 What does that mean for me?
 The Theatre is a wise choice. Now is not the time for plays.
 An anatomy theatre, huh? You have a talent with puns.
 It means that the Theatre is your place now. Your real home. Tend to the sick, and dissect the dead. \nWork night and day to find a cure for this accursed plague.
 I was planning to.
 I'm not sure if this is the right place to find that cure.
 In that cesspool of infection? You'll have one fewer doctor in a couple of days.
 I know what you're thinking. You want to look for the murderer, avenge your father… \nForget it. Let me handle it. I'll do it better than you. Father would want you to work, not seek vengeance. Work in his stead.
 Let you handle it? Why in the world…?
 I know better than you what Father would want.
 What matters is what I want. Leave Father alone, Stakh.
 You failed him. You hesitated and left him in trouble. In my book, you have forfeited your right to revenge. Leave it to me. I can do better. And you… well, you're a better doctor than me.
 What does this mean for me?
 I'm <i>this</i> close to hitting you, Rubin.
 You're no longer a surgeon. You're a pharmacist. I'm better at dissecting people—in all senses, Burakh. But to create an infusion, like Isidor did… that requires your intuition. Your hands. It gives me no pleasure to admit all this, but it's true.
 Spare me your lectures, Stakh.
 No.
 I'll do whatever duty requires of me. Got it?
 This is humiliating… Father purposefully charges me with tasks that present our family in the ugliest possible light. \nSupplying the Fund with adequate food and medicine is clearly impossible. My efforts here are futile!
 Why?
 What does this mean for me?
 Going door to door and seizing people's stockpiles of medicine and food? Insanity. They won't hand it over, of course. They barely have anything left.
 How did this happen?
 No one knows why the train is almost a month late! We've maintained regular shipments of meat and skins—so where's our pay? Where's the regular supply train? \nWe're on the brink of starvation. There are no stocks left. Which means everyone's on their own now, and I will have to kneel in front of my father and take responsibility for this fiasco.
 Got it. The early bird gets the worm.
 They will, if you ask right.
 You're a smart man. You'll find a way.
 If it's the same sickness, all measures are pointless. Wishful thinking; delusional actions. For it's clear what we're dealing with. Fire from heaven. The Great Flood. No one shall be spared, save for the ten righteous men.
 But we need to fight. That's what makes life meaningful—whatever's left of it.
 You have a fever. You're delirious.
 …So what does that mean for me?
 Forget the plague. You can't affect it. Think of yourself, not of the disease. Search your soul. Are you a righteous man, or are you one of the cattle for the slaughter? Whom will it kill, and whom will it spare? And why? \nThis is the curious question which must be answered. By me, doctor, not you.
 Yeah, that much is clear.
 It is a curious thought, true. I'll consider it.
 But you are Olgimsky's private doctor now, aren't you? I guess he'll object, then. Or even forbid you to risk your life.
 Fair enough. My life just became very precious.
 Did he tell you that? Bullshit.
 I am my father's son. Olgimsky is no one to me.
 Ahh, Burakh. What a timely visit. This key is rightfully yours. It unlocks Factory Building 3, a place where your father used to do his work. Please take it. Just… no need to publicize our conversation, okay?
 Why?
 All right. Deal.
 I can't reach Taya for now.
 
 I can't reach Taya for now.
 The Termitary is locked. Perhaps I could convince its owner to let me in?
 
 The Termitary is locked. Perhaps I could convince its owner to let me in?
 I have no way to reach Khan Kain for now.
 
 Khan barely leaves the new building across the river. I can't reach him.
 Screw you.
 Maybe the herbs are wrong… But Old Man used these ones… But I guess I don't remember them all…
 What the hell are you doing?
 Put that back. And get away from the table!
 Listen here, you little… This is the last time you've touched my things without permission. Got it?
 Whaddya want from me? Can't you see I'm making a cure?
 For freckles?
 Wow. You must be a trained doctor.
 …Old Man could make any cure. A piece of this, a piece of that… An herbal tincture… He fixed everything, from dislocated joints to the blues.
 Yes, that's the kind of man Father was. You and I are in a different league.
 You're too young. I'll do it without you.
 I mean, you're in no hurry, right? So I'll make the cure myself. I remember some things… Maybe like a poultice, at least, so it wouldn't burn so bad.
 A poultice, huh? No. Poultices won't save us.
 You know, perhaps the burning is fine? If it helps someone survive.
 Shush! I'm thinking.
 
 Where have you been? We're drowning in work.
 You're a quick one, though.
 
 
 That's why I came. What do you need me to do?
 I have my own work to do.
 All right, genius, tell me. What's on your mind?
 Father knew how to make… concoctions. He mixed tissue with twyre infusions.
 You're a slow one.
 What do you do here?
 If the screams are any indication, the sand plague is painful. These people need care. Dirty care. Prosecting the dead, studying infected organs… Dankovsky's orders.\nWhat else can be done? We try different older medicines, study their effects. But the supply is short…
 Is that it?
 Exactly. So shouldn't we be making medicine?
 Autopsies? Teach the butchers. Dirty care… Important work, sure. But is that really the best use for my hands?
 I had more urgent business.
 Nothing yet.
 No, you're right. We need to observe the sick, work with the dead. There's no other way.
 Damn it, there's no time. It spreads fast, and kills quicker. I doubt it'll take a week to destroy everyone in the Town. If quarantines hold, ten days at best.
 So you're an optimist.
 Your father knew many things, true. But he didn't even have time to teach me, even though I was by his side all those years, sleeping on his floor like a dog. I tried my best, but this work requires a certain talent. Like his.\nAnd you? You learned nothing from him.
 So we'll have to rely on my talent.
 Who knows… Perhaps I did.
 I should have accepted the inheritance.
 I was with him in the First Outbreak. I know the sand plague. I'm no mystic, but… it's some punishment from heaven. More complex than disease.\nTo cure such an ill, one must <i>be</i> Isidor. But even he failed.
 He failed. I won't.
 So I will have to become him, then. Who else, after all.
 Blah blah! Empty words. Why are you always so arrogant? It always got under my skin.
 Father always said we should look for connections among things. That is how he made those mixtures.
 Then shouldn't we give up? Just try to survive and hope for the best.
 Fewer than that. We need to find another way.
 How do you know?
 It's all about mixtures, Rubin. The right mixtures of the right components.
 I'll follow the Lines. That's what makes me different from you.
 You're an idiot.
 <i>You're</i> an idiot.
 I agree. But I'm a stubborn idiot.
 You would need to become a teacher to accomplish that, but you chose to split away from your father. You're no Isidor, Cub.
 You're a broken record. Just trust me, like you once did. If you can.
 We'll see.
 You, on the other hand, have turned into his shadow. How does that help? Go on, wipe the foreheads of the ill. I can't listen to their screaming.
 …So? What's the plan? Did you lose your tongue?
 The plan… The plan is this. Do you know what a serum is, kid?
 Can we make that?
 Not you. But I can try. Though it takes time…
 Sure. We need someone who wouldn't die of the infection. But we haven't met anyone like that yet…
 We can… Regardless of whatever some <i>cocksure</i> doctors say.
 So now what? Where do we start?
 With infected organs. We need to inspect them more closely, and mix what we find with something else, too.
 This is my job, kid. But don't worry, I won't leave you behind.
 We start with deliberation, and only move to action after that.
 And what do you do now, I wonder? Seek a salve that will slay me? Oh, you dear, warm being… Are you sure you want to challenge me, earthly man?
 So, you are a living thing after all?
 Indeed. I am life itself.
 Never would I have guessed that.
 Oh, yes.
 I'm not here to pick a fight. I'm here to help the sick.
 Well said, Burakh! Indeed you know the Lines, if you see this clearly. You are no fool, unlike that Bachelor, or the Changeling. There is no helping them see truth. You, however, love life dearly.
 Do <i>you?</i>
 Everyone loves life.
 And what is the next step in this plot you weave? I would like to know.
 I'm making a cure.
 I'm not telling <i>you.</i>
 Is that so? And yet, all you touch dies.
 You jest, surely? You are like a bairn making stew from sod and bones. \nWhat was that red stuff? Guts from menfolk? Bah! Man-guts won't do, Burakh, oh no. Your bodies are weak. Try your foolish potion on someone, and you will see that it is worthless.
 This one might fail. The next one… who knows?
 There are other organic components out there. Something might work.
 Life finds a way, always. Sooner or later I'll find something to defeat you.
 You mean to test everything you can find? What wisdom! You should be done in forty years, if you live to reach such an age. \nI might cut short your woe, for I am not without kindness. The fool will die, and the wise shall receive my help.
 I don't mean to test <i>every</i> combination of ingredients.
 It won't take that long.
 You're much simpler than you like to think.
 I do not stand still, menkhu. I shift, and shift quickly. Will you race me?
 There must be something that affects all of your strains.
 You're lying, I can feel it. Get lost, I have a potion to test.
 All right. I'll give you a head start. Get lost.
 So when are we doing field work? I'm sick of sitting around here.
 Did you see that thing just now?
 Ironic.
 I've seen everything around here. I remember every corner. I could totally pawn my eyes now, 'cause I don't even need them anymore. \nSo will you take me to do fieldwork?
 So you didn't notice anything? At all?
 I guess there was a gust of wind. Like a draft. You forgot the door, maybe?
 That's what I thought.
 Why are you so eager?
 And the conversation? Did you hear it?
 …So you've made a sample, right? Are we going to test it or now?
 We need to find a sick person. An easier task than I'd like.
 <i>I</i> will. Not you.
 So you'll give your sample to the sick person, but then they need observation, right? I can help. Deal? I'll wear a face mask and everything…
 Observation is not required. We'll know the results immediately.
 Pffft. Big surprise. You know, I'll leave one day. At least the Old Man taught me about herbs. You don't care. You wouldn't even beat me if I broke rules.
 Oh, I can provide <i>that</i> kind of teaching all right.
 Patience.
 Don't let the door hit you on the way out.
 They'll be observed at the hospital.
 It's just the first sample. We're at the beginning of a long journey.
 What if it doesn't help? How will you know what to do next?
 I think I just got a new friend. They'll tell me.
 I'll look inside them when they die. Something's bound to change.
 Perhaps I'll ask Dankovsky.
 
 
 Scalpel
 Either a weapon that can take someone's life, or a tool to extract organs.
 In our town, it is forbidden to deny the sacred wholeness of a body by cutting it open. Only a certain caste of people, menkhu, are allowed to do that. My father is one, though. The rest follows.
 Common revolver ammo.
 Twyre, the herb with many faces. Used to make tinctures.
 Twyre, the herb with many faces. Used to make tinctures.
 Twyre, the herb with many faces. Used to make tinctures.
 A rare, prickly herb, growing wherever blood has been spilled. Herbs are used to make tinctures.
 A weed. Who knew tinctures can be made from these, too?
 A rare, bitter herb, growing wherever there is fear and anguish. Herbs are used to make tinctures.
 "Medrel" Tincture
 "Zürkh" Tincture
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 "Yas" Tincture
 Boosts immunity. Reveals disease symptoms when given to an infected person.
 A body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 Boosts immunity. Reveals disease symptoms when given to an infected person.
 Boosts immunity. Reveals disease symptoms when given to an infected person.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from brain tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from heart tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from kidney tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from liver tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from brain tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from heart tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from kidney tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from liver tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from brain tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from heart tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from kidney tissue.
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from liver tissue.
 Prompter
 Notkin asks you to come by, big bear. Looks like our troubles hunt in packs.
 What's going on?
 One of our lads, Patches, came down with somethin' nasty. He's burning up, won't last long. That dandy doctor from the Capital examined him. Told us the pills would kill him for sure.
 How'd he even find you all?
 What do you mean, pills will kill him?
 Did he tell you anything else?
 Dunno, he just came sniffing about. Was looking for something. In the walls, in the kennels, even in the air.
 So why didn't he help?
 How should I know? He was rambling on about them being old and stale and 'tibiotic or something. That guy is a worthless fraud, he is. Wants to board us up inside our hideout and let us rot.
 Antibiotics.
 He said our place should be locked up, so we don't spread whatever Patches got. Maybe it's catching? If you ask me, I think Patches just ate some moldy crackers…
 So why didn't the dandy help you?
 Tell Notkin I'm on my way.
 Tell Notkin I'm on my way.
 I'm busy, kid. Find someone else to bother.
 Notkin told us: "Go and find the younger Burakh. If anyone can make sense of this mess, it's Isidor's son. That fancy weasel only thinks about boarding us up, so Burakh's our only hope."
 We'll see.
 I'm no therapist.
 Quit it with the praise already.
 Was someone else poisoned?
 The Tanners
 The Maw
 The Hindquarters
 The Cemetery
 The Skinners
 The Bridge Square
 The Cape
 The Spleen
 The Station
 The Chine
 The Flank
 The Marrow
 The Crude Sprawl
 Warehouses
 The Atrium
 The Factory
 
 We scrounged up all these pills from all over town. But the big-city doctor said Patches will die if we give him any… His body can't take the strain. \nBut you… You're going to try anyway, aren't you?
 Pills? Is this rat poison or something?
 He said those are antibiotics. Rambled on about them being old, stale, more harm than good… Said we need to know exactly what's wrong before we can use them. Patches is burning up like a lit match, but there's no knowing why…
 If we can't know what's wrong with him, what can I do? I deal in surgery…
 What makes you think I can do better than that dandy?
 Old Burakh would've had something for this. He used herbs to find out what's wrong with his patients. Used to say twyre reveals everything hidden in a body. \nCan you do that?
 I can do many things.
 Let's have a look at Patches.
 You're a doctor too, aren't you? You can heal him. Maybe you can cut away the illness… take out his appendish or something.
 Diagnosis is always the first thing, knucklehead. Always! You can't play medicine by ear!
 Should I cut off one of his legs, too, just to be safe?
 Steppe
 
 
 I'll have to brew a little something, first… Can he make it three hours?
 That big-city doctor was just here, too. Told me to pass a message on: "Don't waste your time on Patches, it's over for him. Instead, pull yourself together and come see me. I've got something important for you." That's it.
 That's what he said? He can get bent.
 And what do <i>you</i> think?
 Guess I'll go have a talk with the Bachelor… about the Hippocratic Oath, if nothing else.
 Get off my back, boy.
 Is he gonna make it?
 Hear his steady breathing? He'll live.
 \n…Is he gone?
 I'm afraid so.
 …The Bachelor was right. Patches was always a goner. He said it was some terrible illness. That there is no cure, and we all need to be quarantined. \nMaybe he wanted to talk to you about that. Are you going to see him now?
 Right, he was here. What did he want?
 I'm sorry, boy. I tried, but it wasn't enough.
 Sadly, the best-laid plans of mice and men oft go badly… as Grief likes to say.
 Too early to say. Time will tell.
 And that Bachelor said it was no use! I knew he was lying, the big-city grifter. "Impossible" this, "goner" that… Nonsense. Wanted you to abandon us and go see him about some urgent business instead.
 So he wanted me to abandon a patient in favor of chatting with him? Charming.
 Well he, uh… he told us things looked grim, and that you should drop everything to go talk to him. \nBecause, he said, it's a desperate situation and our lot has to be quarantined. He said you shouldn't even come here, so you don't catch it yourself!
 I see. I should pay the man a visit.
 I wonder what's so urgent…
 Your gang should stay put for now. Keep off the streets, all right?
 Well, he told us it was hopeless… We were worried you'd believe him and leave Patches to die. What did you give him, by the way? One of your old man's tinctures?
 No, this is one of my own… I have accepted his legacy.
 You're a shifty one, aren't you? You should have more faith in me.
 Act II
 Act I
 Global page.
 Act III
 MM Prototype.
 Make sure he gets plenty of water. I'll go see what the Bachelor wants…
 I come to you, yargachin, with news. Sahba has died so you may live.
 Sahba? Who is that?
 What's that supposed to mean?
 Our leader. Our protector. Our teacher. She loved your father, yargachin.
 I'm sorry.
 The children waited for your help, the help of a Burakh. You let them down. In honor of your name, Sahba did your work. It didn't go well. She paid with her life.
 What children? What are you talking about, Worm?
 Damn it! I wasn't fast enough!
 You are lost, yargachin. You misunderstand fate. You misunderstand your place in the Kin. Your role is Isidor's role. Become his heir, shuu dee.
 Bish. I do not want to.
 You have been crowned heir. Thank Sahba. You can avoid fate, but others will carry the burden. And it may break them, as it broke Sahba.
 Got it, Worm.
 I am to give you the udhar that contains your inheritance. Here it is. You can turn away from it, if you want. But if you do, do not be shocked when everything around you ceases to make sense.
 Bayarlaa. Now leave.
 I know best what my father would want from me.
 I can. And you can't force me to decide.
 Siskin
 Tot
 Swift
 Flinch
 Infected Person
 Corpsman
 Teensy
 Chickadee
 Herb Bride
 Ouzel
 Crow
 Goose
 Pochard
 Odongh
 Odongh
 Militia
 Soldier
 Kayura
 Starling
 Oriole
 Dove
 Herbs are the words of Earth. She grants them to us by splitting herself open; and so, an herb given to the human body can tell us what ails it.\n\nEach blade of twyre is unique. Herbalists tell them apart by their voices.
 Herbs are the words of Earth. She grants them to us by splitting herself open; and so, an herb given to the human body can tell us what ails it.\n\nEach blade of twyre is unique. Herbalists tell them apart by their voices.
 Rumor has it, sand pest can also be transmitted through word and thought. Bullshit… It has to be bullshit.
 A section of brain tissue. Crossed with defects.
 Infected Brain
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 Herbs are the words of Earth. She grants them to us by splitting herself open; and so, an herb given to the human body can tell us what ails it.\n\nEach blade of twyre is unique. Herbalists tell them apart by their voices.
 Herbs are the words of Earth. She grants them to us by splitting herself open; and so, an herb given to the human body can tell us what ails it.\n\nAshen swish has an acerbic smell and prickly texture.
 Herbs are the words of Earth. She grants them to us by splitting herself open; and so, an herb given to the human body can tell us what ails it.\n\nSwevery is plain, but resilient.
 A body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 A body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 Herbs are the words of Earth. She grants them to us by splitting herself open; and so, an herb given to the human body can tell us what ails it.\n\nWhite whip is poisonous. It can kill.
 Siskin
 Tot
 Swift
 Finch
 Tot
 Siskin
 Finch
 Ouzel
 Odongh
 Soldier
 The black-coat said Patches has until the evening to live. Not even until the nightfall!
 That's all the time I need.
 Run along. I'll be there soon.
 Swift
 
 Who are you?
 Just the milkman. Don't mind me.
 Who are you? You look weird.
 Artemy Burakh. Surgeon.
 What do you want? You look like you can hardly read. And I doubt you're into stargazing.
 Where's Daniil Dankovsky? He's staying here, right?
 Why would I introduce myself first? I don't talk to strangers.
 Why so rude? Where's your hospitality?
 My name is Artemy. Are we acquainted now?
 I'm Burakh. Local doctor. You must have heard of me.
 You lie. I know Burakh. He's twenty-five years older than you, and kind. And you smell of blood, like a wolf.
 Well… Things don't always turn out right. 
 Oh, like you've seen a lot of wolves. Outside of books.
 I'm Eva. Eva Yan. I've been allowed to live here for as long as I'd like.
 Is that so? I remember a time when this observatory actually was used.
 So this is like… the Kains' guesthouse?
 I guess you just appeared here spontaneously, huh?
 He… he isn't here. And he isn't coming. He's gone to the Town Hall. For a meeting. An important meeting. With doctors.
 Who's that walking upstairs, then? Pacing impatiently? Waiting for me?
 Why would he set up our meeting here, then?
 Just mice… No, I mean… uh… ghosts! Restless souls! There are lots of them here.
 Uh huh. Could've guessed that myself.
 Pretty huge mice, huh? You must be an excellent chef.
 Doctor Dankovsky ordered us to meet him here, by the house he's staying at. We've been waiting for half an hour, but he still isn't coming out. Meaning he's busy. So we wait. You will too.
 No way. I'm not waiting, I'm going in.
 Who are you?
 Volunteers. Orderlies. He made us put on these clothes and come to him.
 The man clearly has theatrical ambitions. Why did he make you wear… this?
 He has a strange sense of humor.
 Take these rags back to the Theatre and go home.
 Flea protection. He said we'd thank him soon. And we believe him.
 Well, aren't you a bunch of gullible fellows.
 Good that you're taking hygiene so seriously.
 Flea protection? This town hasn't had fleas in twenty years.
 He couldn't! He didn't! And you know what? You're not welcome in this house!
 Stop shaking. We need to talk business.
 You're a bad liar, sweetheart. I think I'll take a look upstairs.
 Happy now? Don't ever do that again.
 So he's off to the Town Hall, huh?
 Mice indeed. Sorry I didn't believe you.
 Uh huh. To the Town Hall. And then to the Theatre… He said he had an… important appointment…
 Right. One can tell at a glance that he's an avid theatregoer.
 Something isn't right here.
 …With some doctors, yes. I suppose that would be me.
 Well, off to the Town Hall.
 Earth warm your roots, emshen.
 Who are all these people, Sahba? What do they want?
 My legs aren't <i>that</i> crooked, khetey.
 They respect me, you see. I know not the Lines, but I sense Earth. I speak to them on her behalf. They believe I am made of soil, like shabnak-adyg, though they don't call me that.
 They ask strange questions, Sahba. Why do they come to you?
 So you are like a religious teacher, to the Kin. Did Father know?
 …No. I shielded him from this. Remember: It was I who loved him. I was not loved in return, for he regretted me coming into being… I reminded him of his bitter sin.
 What sin?
 The First Outbreak. Do you know how old I am? I first awoke five years ago, when it happened. There were many dead, and many of the dead were of our people, the Khatanghe. The Crude Sprawl is a poor district.
 But what were you shielding him from?
 What do these people want here?
 I teach the truth of the Kin to these people. I retell our old legends. I remind them of Boddho's will, of how the world is a body. I hear the Earth, and speak her will for them. I make sure they know where they came from, and where they are going. \nA sick people, a weak people needs this. Our future hangs by a thread.
 I've talked to them… I suppose I did your work for you.
 But what is your role in all this?
 From what is about to happen. Khatanghe want blood. \nHe was a kind man. He needed not to know of his people's anger. Of how he himself stoked that fury. They would never hurt him for what he had done; he was too venerated. But they will take it out on the Town.
 So you're all plotting rebellion?
 They don't seem angry to me… Confused, perhaps.
 I knew that would happen. You have done well, following the Lines.
 You think so? My answers were not the same you would have given them.
 Why were they asking me, then, and not you?
 Lines, Lines, what is it with you people and Lines? Ugh. I've hated this nonsense since I was a child.
 They believe they come here for advice. False. They have long since made up their minds. Now only their weakness sows doubt in them; we take on the burden of that doubt. Whatever we tell them, they'll do what they think is right.
 Yeah, I used to flip coins… I always knew what to do before the coin even fell, no matter which side was up.
 Is that your idea of help?
 They are helping us, not the other way around. The question matters, not the answer; to the listener, not the speaker. They carry their own stories; you carry yours. Such is the truth of the Lines, tangher. The Truth of the Earth.
 You're a good teacher indeed.
 I'll… give this some thought.
 I disagree, Sahba.
 
 
 What an interesting place.
 Who are you?
 Kharaalai, I'm in trouble. My sister disappeared. Have you seen her? She has four moles on her cheek. I fear she may have ended up in the Slicer House. They'll sell her piece by piece now…
 What Slicer House?
 Beshe. I haven't seen her.
 A bad place in the Town, behind the Guzzle. Var lives there, a chemist. He buys body parts—sells them, too. Many know, but none act.
 I don't know him.
 I know him.
 They say that we kill people and bring Var the guts. That's always been a lie. But now? I'm not sure… Where else could my sister be?
 Who knows. You'll find her.
 Perhaps she was killed during the witch hunt.
 I think I should pay a visit to the Slicer House. Might be useful...
 Have you been to the governor? About the patrols, I mean? The pay is good, but… too good, actually. Suspicious. What's going on with that?
 What patrol?
 Not my kind of work. I'm too impatient.
 If you're in doubt, flip a coin.
 All strong men—who aren't cowards—should report to the Town Hall, it went. They might even announce an emergency situation. I wonder why? A revolt at the Factory, maybe? It's not working. Hear the silence?
 I guess they haven't caught the murderer yet. Perhaps they need people for a raid.
 So the governor's in the Town Hall? Got it.
 Fat Vlad said the Olgimskys got you in their pocket. Tell me, then, the hell's going on at his Factory! Why'd it shut down? Will we still be paid?
 Olgimsky thinks I belong to him? Did I hear you right?
 I don't know anything. I don't work there.
 He said you're his protégé, that no one touch you. Means he has plans.
 Oh, so he's got plans, that damn fat cat.
 I tried to help Patches, but failed. At least I made an attempt, I suppose.
 
 I had less time than I expected.
 According to Notkin, Bachelor Dankovsky has deemed me worthy of speaking with him and wants to see me at once. I wonder what for?
 
 Bachelor Dankovsky has deemed me worthy of speaking with him and wants to see me at once. Must be something serious.
 Eva swears that Dankovsky is in the Town Hall. Well, that's not hard to check.
 Something is very wrong. The alarm is coming from the Town Hall. I should hurry there.
 Eva swears that Dankovsky is in the Town Hall. Well, that's not hard to check.
 I see. I'll have to take care of that, then.
 Exactly. So leave me alone.
 Hey! We just paid respects to your father at the cemetery. You know if you don't go there within the hour, he's gonna get turned into kindling?
 …Turned into kindling?
 Damn it!
 They refuse to bury him. You didn't hear? I think it's blasphemy, myself.
 Shut up. I'm on my way.
 Who would refuse…? No, don't tell me. I'll figure it out.
 Grace says Mom still hasn't forgiven me. It's been two years since she died, but the grudge lives on.
 How does Grace know?
 Who is Grace?
 She talks to the dead. I swear. She can press her ear to the ground, fall asleep, and wake up with news. It's a gift, 'cause she's nutso. Her dad was addicted to twyrine. Her mom, too, even while she carried Grace.
 You swear? I guess I should check.
 Seems someone needs to find a better place for the girl…
 The air in the Hindquarters has turned foul. Heavy, viscous air… Some rift opened in the ground, maybe? I'm not sure.
 Death has arrived there. That's why.
 Must be some sort of vapor…
 I need to talk to Khan at the Tower. Though, the Town is all abuzz now, makes me kinda reluctant to leave.
 What Tower?
 Oh, all this is so very interesting.
 You blind, big fella? Just look over there. The Tower across the river… Our Polyhedron. The only place where life is real.
 Khan… I know the name. He's in the Tower?
 When was that thing even built? it wasn't here when I left.
 Our Taya is in the Termitary, isn't she? Why was it locked? Will they open it soon?
 I don't know. I think they will.
 Wait a second. What Taya? Taya Tycheek?
 Taya Tycheek. But we call her the Mother Superior. Mother Superior! Isn't that cool as heck? It's Capella's idea!
 It's cool, all right. Cool as heck. But I need to talk to her.
 It's a mouthful.
 My wife was killed yesterday. How can I look our children in the eyes now? I've lost the right to be called their father.
 Why?
 I'm sorry.
 I promised her we'd share every joy, every woe. I promised to protect her. What use is that now? What use are words without action?!
 That's… kind of true.
 What could you have done?
 I could have been… assertive. Think faster when it went down. I could have acted quickly, efficiently, instead of staying in my head! If only…
 Stop whining.
 You know? This is true for me, too. I need to be bolder.
 What's done is done. Live on, pal. For the children.
 See you tonight at Sahba's place? It's dangerous, yes… This is <i>ngan-pa dgu-’dzoms,</i> a place you must not bring outsiders.\nEveryone's looking for a shabnak-adyg. It's good they forgot Sahba.
 I'm an outsider. Why are you telling me this?
 Do you go there every night?
 You're Kin, Khatangher. Sahba talked about you a lot these days. We waited for you, yargachin.
 In that case, you can wait some more.
 The Kin can even live there. People come and go, yes.
 So will I.
 So, I'm Kin to you?
 Your meetings don't fit into my plans.
 Got it.
 Did you know folks are murdering women in the street? Those are your men, Bad Grief! Yours!
 Do you have dynamite?
 What for?
 I wanna blow up the railroad tracks.
 They say an inquisitor's coming. We should keep them from getting in, don't you think?
 Just nostalgic. Remember how we used to put bullets on train tracks?
 I see, I see…\nListen, artilleryman. You're a surgeon, not a bomber. Gotta be careful with those hands. Let's tackle this as a team.
 Why not? Let's do it together. Just like the good old days.
 …You're oddly enthusiastic about this. I was only joking.
 Go into the steppe after midnight. Follow the railroad tracks… The long ones that unfurl to the outside world. A real line, not your metaphors.\nYou'll find me waitin'.
 I'll figure it out.
 I understand all kinds of lines. I'll find you.
 Those aren't metaphors.
 You finally came. I'm freezin' my ass off, here.
 What's with the fire? For a second, I thought you'd started without me.
 A fire… A signal fire, Cub. Used to summon.
 I would've found you without it.
 What makes you think it's for you? It's not.
 …Are you pranking me?
 Summon who? Bos Turokh?
 No, Cub. Bos Turokh is just a steppe folktale. Me, I'm simple. An ordinary man. And my goals, unlike yours, are ordinary too.
 What are you talking about? Is this some kind of prank, asshole?
 Use your head, artilleryman. Of course we're not blowing anything up! This railroad is my bread and butter. My veins! Hell, my carotid arteries!\nBlowing things up… It doesn't matter. The inquisitor will come. They'll instill order. Fix you terrorists.
 Are you stupid, Grief? You'll be the first person they hang!
 Well, I doubt you're trying to summon the inquisitor.
 Are you <i>sure</i> you're okay? Let me check your fever.
 All right. Did you bring the dynamite?
 Tell me, Cub: Have you completely lost it? What dynamite? What even makes you think I have some? Do you think I'm General Ashes? I'm a knife man. I never really told you I even <i>had</i> dynamite!
 So are we… not blowing anything up?
 …They're a smart bunch, or so I've heard. Explains the unique status. An' smart folk tend to stick together. Help each other climb the ladder, even…\nIt's you who should worry about gettin' hanged, idiot. Dynamite…
 My fault for trying to work together with you.
 All right. Forget it. Let's just watch the fire.
 Knife
 Too rough for medical procedures. Too dirty for cutlery. Only good for taking lives.
 Murder is a sin worse than digging wells in our town. Not because the soul is considered sacred, but because the body is. What is not whole, is not holy. A torn body is a foul mockery of the universe.
 [a conversation about how the fight could have gone better, and about innovative wound-dressing]
 [let's talk]
 [not interested]
 That you were, pal, that you were. Tired? Or do you need a bite? A drink? I can share. But you'll have to pay for the water. Not too much around.
 I could use some bread.
 I need water. My skin's starting to crack.
 You're right… I need sleep.
 "Here"? Where is… here?
 No need… I've been there, already.
 But the earth doesn't.
 Do you think they still remember you? It's been six years, after all.
 Well… maybe not all of them. But someone has to, right?
 They do.
 One of them's definitely forgotten.
 Burakh.
 Do you believe them? Before you answer, Burakh: I implore you to think, truly think. Thousands of lives might depend on your answer.
 Yes. I believe them.
 …Oh yeah. The well is not why I called you today.\nYou see, these esteemed people here are trying to convince me the odonghs are… well, immune to our infection. They supposedly do not get the sand plague.
 What does that have to do with you?
 They should've come to me with that instead.
 Well, if they don't, lucky them.
 You see, I supervise certain things at the Bull Enterprise. I am, after all, an Olgimsky. \nA large number of our workers are odonghs. Almost everyone who works with the livestock is an odongh. It's hard, dirty work. And if what they're saying is true…
 …Then you can resume production.
 …Then they can be tasked with certain unpleasant work.
 …Then in the end, they'll be the only survivors in the entire Town.
 Not quite, Burakh. Not quite. I'm racking my brain over a different concern… Don't ask me what it is. \nJust look at them and tell me: Are they lying? Or could it be true? After all, you—your father was a steppe man.
 I think I do need the details, though. What's troubling you?
 All right. I'll look at them.
 And how am I going to be able to tell? With a medical exam? You're joking. The Bachelor's your man for this one.
 Now let's make this clear, Burakh. I like you, and we have interests in common. But I will not discuss the Factory with you. I will not discuss the inner workings of our business. \nOur workers are our capital. It's our family enterprise.
 As you wish, then.
 I already have. They're not like us… But that doesn't mean anything.
 Yes, what they're saying makes sense. I've never seen a sick odongh.
 Let's take a look at those odonghs of yours, then.
 A medical exam would be pointless. I'll ask them and see if they're telling the truth.
 No. I don't believe them.
 They believe what they say. If it's true, though…
 What they say is interesting. They're chimeras. They truly are a blend of two kinds of matter. And there's a truth in that. But I have to think it over.
 Don't believe them. They're just like us.
 I do believe they actually don't get sick. They're chimeras, not humans.
 Why the long face? What happened?
 Well… I think I figured something out. About the cure.
 I just don't see too many reasons to celebrate, to be honest.
 Will you tell me?
 I know what kind of organic sample we need. But I've got no idea where to find it.
 No.
 C'mon, keep talking! Do I need to pry every single word out of you?
 So, bulls have antibodies, right? Cells that destroy the disease. And people can carry the microbe itself in their blood, but they can't weaken it. Do you understand? I can't get the two together. But I need to.
 <i>C'mon</i> me once again and I'll make you clean floors. Got it?
 So what? Can't you mix them?
 I need some sort of… minotaur. But they don't exist.
 No, I can't just mix the two samples. They're too different. Long story.
 So what's your plan now?
 I'll look for a creature that combines the traits of both man and bull.
 The world, you know… It's more alive than it looks. Some things seem inanimate, but when you peer closer…
 Not sure. Not yet.
 So, how's it going?
 Badly.
 Well, I never expected to succeed right away.
 But you can make… um, that stuff that cures the disease. Antibiotics. You said that yourself.
 The best our antibiotics can do is stall the disease.
 See? You're a man of fate, Burakh. What are you trying to prove? You can't change fate. Have you heard the story of Oedipus?
 Yes. I've read about him.
 My name was Jacob Sterkh. Worked in shipping. Two marriages, both happy. Brought up a daughter. \nFriends woke me up in the night; they were getting a posse together to catch old Kain's killer. We ambushed him at the Station. That's where I was killed; with my own knife, no less.
 Burakh. The situation is regretful. I just didn't have time to warn you.
 This was ugly of you.
 I understand. Forget it.
 You shouldn't have started the meeting without me.
 Well, let's get down to business. We have three doctors in town. Four, if we count the deranged girl who claims to have a healing touch—rubbish, of course. But she has a lot of energy, and she knows a thing or two, so it won't hurt to let her work. \nAnd Burakh, allow me to be frank?
 Shoot.
 We're wasting time.
 …Wait a second, you mean the girl in the wool cap, with needles for eyes?
 Where did you graduate? What are your qualifications? Do you have a degree?
 I don't have a degree.
 I'm a surgeon. And a damn good one.
 Medical school.
 Burakh, I want you to become my aide. Our primary goal is developing a vaccine. You're a local, and… enterprising. I need your help.
 Vaccines aren't my area of expertise.
 A vaccine? We wouldn't finish that until after the whole town is extinct. But what an amazing breakthrough for your resume, right?
 A vaccine is something you create for the future, not for people who are sick now! You just want to protect your buddies in the Capital if the plague spreads, huh?
 Other towns like this one exist, you know. \nIf this disease is half as lethal as the outbreak five years ago, this place is doomed. Other people can still be saved. Or perhaps you have better suggestions?
 I'll think of something. I won't let you just give up on the sick.
 How can you know that? You weren't here five years ago. You weren't here five days ago!
 Just say it. What do you want from me?
 I will make the vaccine, but I can't do it without you. All you need to do is be at hand and do as I say. I will take full responsibility for the situation.
 Perhaps I'll drop by… if I have the time.
 No deal. I am responsible for my actions, no one else. Family tradition.
 So what do you have in mind, Burakh?
 I need to find a way to… save people.
 Neither were you. But I've been collecting evidence—since yesterday, when you were dashing around the steppe. My explorations have actually been successful. \nAnd mind your tone, Burakh. I don't take kindly to rudeness.
 Familiarity breeds affection. I'm sure you'll grow to appreciate it.
 Yes, I wasn't here for the First Outbreak. But this is my hometown.
 They are mine. Our goal is to stall the epidemic… and prevent a worldwide pandemic.
 My goal is survival. We're each on our own, emshen.
 A worldwide… huh. You're pretty honest about your ambitions, aren't you?
 That's your goal. Mine is to protect my hometown.
 Yes… I guess she wears a cap. And she does have… a presence. You've met?
 We have… but it doesn't matter.
 Don't ever let her close to you! We… we don't need her.
 Forget her. What did you want to talk about?
 Think about it. A curative serum for an unknown disease? This contagious, and this lethal? On such short notice? What a utopian thought. \nA vaccine, on the other hand, can protect the healthy—the people who still have a chance.
 I'd rather take care of those who are already suffering.
 Go to hell, emshen.
 And you're calling me ambitious? If this is the same disease that broke out here five years ago, then plague is like mumps compared to it!
 So what?
 We don't know what really happened during that outbreak!
 
 
 Chief Notkin's pack nest in this warehouse. Kids here trade for food and sharp objects.
 The Soul-and-a-Half Fortress
 
 Var the Scar-Faced buys organs.
 Lara Ravel's mansion. We used to call her Gravel, because she always had an edge on us. I can always have a nap here.
 The Shelter
 My father's house. My house. Locked.
 Bad Grief's Nest
 Grigory Filin, also known as Bad Grief, reigns over a small warehouse kingdom these days.
 The local authorities often visit the place. But the town jail is in the same building.
 The Lump
 The Olgimskys' mansion. Fat Vlad is the owner of the Bull Enterprise, but many just call him "the Master."
 You believe taking your father's vessel was enough to become him? You jest, emshen. You cannot heal. You know not the Lines. \nDon't take too much on, or you'll snap like a rotten bough…
 Well, we'll see now if I can heal or not.
 I don't need your concern. I can take care of myself.
 Fine. I won't.
 Isidor's notes remain at my place. You're in no hurry to take them, are you? I've heard a thing or two about the Lines, I can replicate the Art. What about you, he-who-casts-off-his-own-legacy? Can you?
 They're at your place? Very well. Let's pay it a visit, and there I'll take my legacy.
 Whatever. Do as you will.
 I'll try.
 He will die, emshen. You will take his fate into your hands, and he will die. Stain not your hands with the death of a person who trusts you.
 How do you know he will die?
 You're not a doctor, khetey. I am.
 Who the hell are you?
 You are not a healer yet. You will fail. You're a big man, but not so big as to take on responsibility for others…\nBut someone must try it. This is where you are right. We can't simply let it happen without a fight… So let me fight.
 Then let this be a learning experience for me. Move aside, khetey. I won't hide behind your back.
 Perhaps I'm not so big. But I'm definitely big enough to take responsibility for myself.
 All right. Go on. I'll keep an eye on your progress.
 I am Sahba Usp'tae. The townsfolk call me Aspity. I am respected, for I can speak on behalf of Earth. I interpret her will. And now I speak to you on behalf of your father.
 Did you know him well?
 Presumptuous…
 I loved him. He made me. I owe him a debt of gratitude.
 But you're not a doctor. How do you know the boy will die?
 Say what you must, and move aside. They're waiting for me.
 I don't know yet.
 Yeah… I could use a cure for the blues now.
 I do. It's the thing that makes people tell the truth.
 No, I mean a blood serum. A cure. Serum treatment.
 So imagine a person gets infected, right? Their body begins fighting the sickness. Creates antibodies.
 D'you live under a rock or something? An alarm rang across the whole Town. Only you and deaf folks haven't heard about the Sand Plague yet…\nA cure needs to be made. A… what's the word? A panacea?
 I know all that.
 A panacea? Fairy tales will do you no good.
 I think you should aim right for the philosopher's stone, kid. Piece of cake.
 I've come… I've come to help. There must be something I can do, right?
 At times like these, reasonable folks stay at home. You should too, Lara.
 I'm sure there's something you can do.
 Well, Stakh's desperate for us to keep busy. Who else could provide cold compresses to the sick?
 …Okay. I'll find a way to help on my own. And you? What are you up to?
 Me? It's a tough one, I suppose. I'm going to make a cure for the sand pest.
 A cure? In these conditions? Don't you need… I don't know, special instruments? An army of chemists? The best we have is a kitchen stove.\nHow do you hope to succeed?
 Are you familiar with how blood serums work?
 Hey, Pasteur and Koch worked in barns. Never stopped them.
 No, I don't. Wait… No, I definitely don't.
 We take blood rich with antibodies, purify it, and inject the patient with the resulting serum.
 We can enhance the antibodies of someone already ill with certain herbs—for example, twyre.
 It won't be perfect. Side effects are almost guaranteed, but it should save the patient. All we need to do is find the right donor.
 And where will you find a suitable donor? Sand pest kills anyone, everyone, and it kills quick. Not a soul survived the outbreak five years past.
 I'll find someone. The blood of sick townsfolk will be a good start.
 I never said it was a person. Such a serum could be made from animals.
 Sick people have antibodies. Maybe only a little, and in certain areas of the body, but they can be found.
 This hunt for blood sounds dangerous, Cub. Won't you just infect yourself? Promise me you'll be as careful as you can. If you need me, please ask.
 I'm not making any promises.
 I promise.
 Thank you, Lara. You're the only one who believes in me.
 It's hard to admit, but I think arrogance is my undoing. This damn microbe is a shapeshifter, a proteus. It eludes me. The vaccine doesn't work. Burakh, this is a dead end.
 It is a dead end, erdem. I've tried all the obvious components, but none of them work.
 I have extracted a microbial culture. I weakened it—it's doable even without all the tools I'm used to.\nBut it's ever-changing! Like a person first sick with pox, then with cholera, then with typhoid fever! What do I do?
 Hm… A sickness like this needs unique antibodies. What kind of creature could produce them?
 This cure… It needs some sort of special tissue. It needs to be more than human…
 There are more kinds of life in the world than it seems at first glance… Could this be the answer?
 And yet, there is a wholeness to this disease. There must be some commonality between all those heinous shapes. What do they share? If I understand that, I could catch it by the tail! The answer must be so close…
 But who says that this creature is beyond reach? Human or not… Who cares.
 It's not even about immunity. The tissue must fight back, not defend… <i>overcome</i> the enemy, not just protect itself!
 The scientific method has never failed me. I've always walked the path it showed me. But science is… a minx. You need to keep her fascinated, to change yourself, invent new things. I need to think outside the box…
 The scientific method… no. Hand-me-down answers won't help me here.
 Searching for answers in one's specialty… in the fields one has unique access to… Hmm…
 When something fights back… that's not a rejection, that's something else. Yes… the answer must be close…
 Thinking outside the box… Yes! That's the approach this problem needs!
 …Which means that I need to approach the problem from a very unusual angle. But it's challenging. The fuller one's memory, the more active the brain, the more limits it imposes upon itself.
 Correct. When you're at a dead end, perhaps what you need is to rise upwards.
 Yes. When it seems like a dead end, that might be an illusion. Just walk through walls.
 Accepting that one is lost… That's a breakthrough all on its own.
 Meaning we just increase the dose, right? Then they'll be cured.
 It's lucky for those infected that I'm in charge instead of you.
 If you increase the dose, the patient will simply die.
 No. We need a serum that can cure the plague once and for all.
 So how do we make a panacea, then?
 We need a different organic tissue… of some kind.
 We need a creature that can withstand this disease. And I don't think it will be human.
 Why should I love you? I don't need to love you at all. I can stop loving you whenever I want.
 What are you doing here, little one?
 I see.
 Did you see an energetic boy with freckles come out of here?
 I didn't. No boy. Nobody came out.
 You don't have to tell me if you don't want to.
 …
 What's wrong? Tell me.
 So why'd you come here, anyway?
 Do you want me to take you home? Where do you live?
 Let's go catch some roosters. I'll show you something.
 Roosters?
 I can't. I'm busy.
 I live in a train car all by myself. And you know, I have a real colorful… thing, I forgot what it's called. I hung it on the opposite wall.
 Not the best place for a little girl to live.
 All quiet for now. I have time to gather my thoughts before I get back to business.
 A train car? It must be cold in there.
 All by yourself? That's not good.
 It's a kind of grass with a little comb on top. I know every kind of grass. They show themselves to me. I know them even better than those dancing-prancing girls.
 Well… That's remarkable.
 Let's go.
 We're not going now. Let's go at night. Come to my train car and use our secret knock. Like this: knock-knock, knock, knock-knock.
 You know what, kid? You're gonna leave that train car. Come live with me.
 Deal. I'll try to remember.
 I don't want to live with you. Why should I live with you? I might come for a visit. Maybe live with you for a tiny bit, later, if you have some food.
 I'll find something.
 Food is… Never mind, I'll get something.
 How fares your kine, Khatangher?
 Do you know what an udurgh is? What does the Khandro sigil stand for?
 Poorly.
 A body that contains a world. Everyone knows that.
 But what does that… mean?
 Everyone but me…
 Be khara, it can be a creature made of many creatures. Like a family. A tagloor—a group of people bound by the same fate.
 You haven't made it more clear.
 I see.
 Our words are erased, Khatangher. We turn our fathers' flutes into sticks. We take old words, big words, and apply them to small things. But the connection to the source is still there. The Lines remember.
 Yes… Connections are like veins. You can't just tear them out.
 Khaya dee. Let Mother Boddho caress your step.
 Father is dead. Should I still insist on rushing home…?
 I let the traitor go. Not sure if Notkin would want to know or not.
 In a warehouse that belongs to kids, something's brewing.
 Well, I cut out the parts he didn't need. Let's see what Bad Grief thinks of that.
 Be khara, you are a true heir to Isidor. You show it with alacrity, with your deeds. You know the ties that bind the world.
 I just try to follow the Lines.
 Drop it, khetey. I will never compare to him. He was a true weaver.
 He cannot be replaced, but someone has to do his job. So here I am.
 Blame not yourself. "A physician is entitled to some mistakes," as your father used to say. He erred, too. What matters is that you tried. You had the courage to try. You took upon yourself his role.
 I did.
 A physician isn't entitled to that.
 Did Father make mistakes, though? I remember no such thing.
 This is your father's udhar, his "warm vessel." Inside is your inheritance. Open it.
 It's heavy…
 Bayarlaa, Sahba. I gratefully accept.
 Any new thoughts on the contents of the udhar?
 No.
 The murderer still breathes. That's what's bothering me.
 I'll think about them.
 What have you got in your pockets?
 Tools. Forget it. Here's what I want to know: What business did you have with my father? Old Burakh?
 Well… we actually went to his place often. He used to teach us things. Why do you ask?
 So you used to go to his place together? All of you? Everyone on this list here?
 Sometimes we'd all go together, sometimes in twos or threes… sometimes alone. A lot of things happen. Why are you asking? It's not like we bothered him; he invited us.
 What did he want from you?
 Maybe one of you knows how he died, then? Maybe you?
 So you were his friends. Did he have enemies?
 No, I don't think he would…
 Think again.
 Kid, you're clearly hiding something. But it's very important for me to know. Do you understand?
 You know what? Ask Capella. She's the oldest of us all, and the best explainer. She's a good person, too.
 Capella? Who's that?
 Olgimsky's daughter, huh? Why her?
 She is like… a big sister to us all. She put together a union.
 A… union? What union?
 All right. I'll ask her.
 Don't worry about it. Just a union. Of people under fifteen. Anyway, ask her. She might be mad at me if I say too much.
 Okay.
 Good. Tight lips are a good skill to have.
 Fat Vlad's daughter. But she's not like him at all. She even lives in a separate wing of the house.
 Is it a good thing or a bad thing that they're different?
 Good.
 What carry you in all those pockets, Burakh?
 Tools. Never mind them… Here's what I'd like to know: What business did you have with my father? With Old Burakh?
 We… went to his place often. He used to teach us things. Why do you ask?
 So you used to go to his home together? All of you? Take a look at this list…
 Sometimes we would all go together, other times in twos or threes… or alone. Many things happened. Why do you ask, though? It's not like we imposed on him; he invited us.
 What did he want from you?
 Maybe one of you knows how he died, then? You, perhaps?
 So you were his friends. Did he have enemies?
 No.
 Think a little harder.
 Kid, you're holding something back. But this is <i>very</i> important to me. Do I make myself clear?
 You know what? Ask Capella. She's the oldest of us all, and the best explainer. She's a good person, too.
 Who's this Capella?
 Olgimsky's daughter, huh? Why her?
 She is like… a big sister to us all. She put together a union.
 A… union? What union?
 …Very well, I'll go talk to her.
 Don't worry about it. Just a union. Of people under fifteen. Anyway, ask her. She might be mad at me if I say too much.
 Okay.
 Good. Tight lips are a good skill to have.
 Fat Vlad's daughter. But she's not like him at all. She even lives in a separate wing of the house.
 Is it a good thing or a bad thing that they're different?
 Good. Don't hold her family against her.
 What's that you're carrying?
 Tools. Forget it. But tell me: What business did you have with my father? Old Burakh?
 Well… we actually went to his place a lot. He used to teach us things. Why?
 So you used to go to his place together? All of you? Look at this list of names.
 Sometimes we'd all go together. Sometimes just two or three… or alone. A lot of stuff happened. Why do you care, though? It's not like we were bothering him. He invited us!
 What did he want from you?
 Maybe one of you know how he died, then? What about you, huh?
 So you were his friends. Did he have enemies?
 Nope.
 Think, okay?
 Kid, you're obviously hiding something. But this is very important to me. Do you understand?
 You know what? Ask Capella. She's the oldest of all of us and she's the best at explaining things. And a good person, too.
 Capella? Who's that?
 Olgimsky's daughter, huh… Why her?
 She's like… a big sister to us all. She created the union.
 A… union? What union?
 …Very well, I'll go talk to her.
 Fat Vlad's daughter. But she's not like him at all. She even lives in a separate wing of the house.
 Is it a good thing or a bad thing that they're different?
 Good.
 I'll use this scalpel you just had lying around, then.
 Huh… You really do know how it works.
 Capella
 Eva Yan
 Scout
 текст: Я отпустил предателя. Уж не знаю, захочет ли атаман Ноткин о том слышать.
 Ну что ж, лишнее я вырезал. Поглядим, что Гриф об этом скажет.
 Who's Notkin?
 The leader of the Soul-and-a-Halves. Everyone knows us. Our headquarters is in the Warehouses.
 I see… We used to have our own hideout over there when we were kids, too.
 I seek them all, all those on your list. Joyfully: I might take them one by one, I might take them all at once. Shall I follow your whim? Shall I kill them one by one?
 Why? Why are they on this list?
 One by one would be better.
 You have me there, warrior. I relish that you are fearless enough to offer straight answers. One by one it is, then.
 Let the boy go. What use is he to you?
 I'll find a way to beat you. Just you wait. I'm not afraid.
 Your father was wiser than you. Mightier. He knew we did not quarrel over mere menfolk's lives. The goal is the Eighth. The kids matter only as long as they are of use to the Eighth.
 Who is the Eighth?
 Useful how?
 Guess! Time yet remains for you.
 You want to play at riddles? I'd rather be the one asking. Want a tough one?
 So, all the people on the list are useful somehow?
 Who slew your father, Burakh?
 I don't know.
 You?
 I'll figure it out soon.
 You are a fool, Burakh. You know nothing. Understand nothing. Call yourself a healer? Don't kid yourself. Who will you heal? From what? Shall you seize an ill babe and cram them full of your "antibiotics"?\nYou're an unbearable bore, no fun at all.
 Likewise. You're not here to be played with. You deserve to be hunted down and destroyed.
 Indeed, surprise me.
 It walks on four legs in the morning, two legs at noon, and three legs in the evening. What is it?
 Thieves came to steal the homeowners, but the house itself escapes through the windows.
 How do I kill you?
 At least I know the list of your future victims.
 Moreso the Eighth.
 I'll figure it out. I'll ask around.
 At least I understand it's not human.
 But what's my fate?
 Fate is not to be fought, beakhead. It must be overcome another way.
 I told you already, Burakh. It's not pretty. You will spill blood. Just let it go, Ripper. Don't be so bull-headed. Just because you have a hammer doesn't mean every problem's a nail.
 Nothing wrong with my head. My brain's functioning just fine.
 If I have a hammer, then you might be in trouble, beakhead.
 What Kain? …Who did you expect to find there?
 Kain? Don't you mean Burakh?
 I was called Kirik. It was my idea to catch the murderer at the Station. So we lay in ambush. The train came. A man got off. "Get him, boys!" I cried. \nThat was stupid of me. The killer would be getting on, not off…
 Take it as a lesson, fool. This world is not for the likes of you.
 I'm sorry.
 It's for the best, Kirik. All of this is for the best…
 They called me Bertie. Short for "Bertrand." And that's one of the kinder nicknames… "Bertie" was fine. A name's just a name. \nI got murdered at the Station last night. Didn't rightly know what I was doing there. Figure I just went along with the herd.
 That's enough tear-jerking.
 With a name like that, it must've been a tough life. It'll be better now.
 I'm sorry, Bertrand.
 Did you enjoy your little chats? They don't blame you, as you saw. I suppose they haven't quite come to terms with their fates yet. Or perhaps they have. Death does that to people.
 If I could only fix it…
 Serves them right. I won't cry over them.
 I'll tell you a story.\nOnce there was a man who wanted to fix everything. He begged on bended knee for a chance to turn back time… And when he got it, history repeated itself. "Good job," we told him. "That's your fate." He asked us, "Once more?"
 So?
 So we let him try once more, but with a catch. He who denies his fate will be punished. He'll keep living as a cripple. Lame. Wounded. See where I'm going with this?
 Did he try again, then?
 I do. Shall we try?
 I don't remember and I don't care. Even if he didn't, there probably wasn't a happy ending. You can't fight fate, Burakh. It's immutable.
 I'll still try.
 He was permanently crippled? I wonder how…?
 I'm not a ripper.
 I'm finished, Doc. Don't come near me. We both know how it is. No escape. No face mask will save you. Don't come by again.
 Hush, now. And don't you dare give up! I'll find a cure!
 How long has it been?
 Not so long. My bones feel like they've been burning for about an hour.
 Does it hurt?
 Don't give up, you hear me? There has to be a way!
 Tell them to carry me away from here! Away from my friends. And our Halves, the fools won't let me go. \nLet them quarantine me! Let them take me away! Otherwise everyone will die! Please, Doc!
 We'll carry you wherever you want. We will. Please, calm down.
 We'll find a way to cure you, boy. Let me give you some medicine…
 I'm sorry.
 Did you catch it from your friend? What's his name… Patches?
 I suppose. I don't know.
 You need to get to the hospital.
 Just don't be afraid. Listen, it's not over yet!
 Patrolman
 Live without looking forward, emshen.
 Khetey, tell me about this word: "udurgh." That's the sigil from the list—the one from my inheritance. What do you know of it?
 I'm trying.
 It is… a creature made up of many other living beings. "A body that contains the world."
 Such as…?
 So, it could be a human being. Millions of things live inside each one of us.
 Perhaps, emshen. I know not such things, I lack your city knowledge. Many living beings inhabit us, like people inhabit Bos Turokh. That, I believe.
 Bos Turokh, the forefather of bulls?
 So, it <i>is</i> a person.
 Bos Turokh, the great bull of elder stories. He is Earth. We follow the Lines when we cut up bulls because in his lines, in his nerves and sinews, Bos Turokh encased the knowledge of how the world is connected.\nWhen opening up a body, a butcher reenacts Creation.
 Bos Turokh created the world. I remember that story.
 Even Worms no longer believe we live on a huge bull.
 Sure, it's metaphor. But a beautiful, clever metaphor. Think of the world as though it is a living thing. Understand that all things are tied to all other things, just like a body. Respect it like a creature with its own free will.
 So you think the "udurgh" is Bos Turokh?
 My father listed a giant bull of legend among his patients? That's absurd.
 Perhaps. Think about it. Your father chose the sigil because your written language lacks a suitable name for such a creature. A body that contains the world. Something living that consists of many parts.
 That doesn't help me at all.
 "A body that contains the world." Could be anything, really.
 That's what the Kin might have called, say, a train. A train, made of many cars. The description fits, you know.
 They might. But unlike illiterate Worms, your father knew the word for "train" well. And I doubt he thought of trains as living things in need of salvation.
 Fair enough.
 Bayarlaa, Sahba. This was an enlightening conversation.
 Yes?
 Stakh, take a look at this sigil. It's called "udurgh." Ever heard of that?
 Nothing. Just passing through.
 More Kin nonsense? They mark bulls with this. What does it matter? I have no interest in their stupid cattle brands.
 So no love for our kind. Why?
 You've never come across the word? "Udurgh." Think for a moment… Maybe my father mentioned it?
 Your father wasted too much effort on that rabble.
 Big words.
 My father and I, we're also of the steppe. Did you somehow forget?
 They distracted him from his work. Wanted him to live for them, toil for them, tend to them!\nAll they need is an owner. A protector. A caretaker. Someone to cling to, like fleas, draining their blood. They're all about blood.
 Someone has a temper. Is this personal?
 Wolves! Wolves, each and every one of them! They surround you, smother you, they wait till you're out of breath, then they press on, and on, and on.\nThey put him into an early grave, the blasted Kin, and I'm soon to follow.
 What, you? What reason could they possibly have?
 "They," huh? Not "you"? So you think I'm a different breed?
 You sound jealous. Or maybe…?
 Well, maybe I gave them a reason. Or maybe it's habit for them by now.\nLook. Take your damn sigil and get lost. You picked a curious time to study folklore. You need work, or what? Let me know, and I'll make you busy.
 I'm working right now, Stakh. Figuring this out is my job, too.
 Folklore… There's an idea. Doesn't Olgimsky's son record steppe folklore?
 You need more sleep, friend.
 Might be the Kin, might not.
 Glad to see you, Burakh.
 You mentioned that you study steppe rites. Does the word "udurgh" mean anything to you?
 They believe a bull's body mirrors the structure of the universe. Your "udurgh" is this sacrificial bull.
 Not quite what I expected…
 Can a person be called that?
 Well, it's complicated. I can't help with the finer points. I know a man well versed in such things: Foreman Oyun. But there's a… predicament.
 A predicament?
 Oyun… I know the name. He was Father's friend. So he could help me?
 The Foreman of the Abattoir. A resourceful and reliable man—irreplaceable, even. He's a link. He helps us keep the Kin under control.
 I know all that. So where is he?
 I need to see him.
 I assume he's locked in the Termitary with the rest of the Kin. Which means he is well out of your reach. You'll have to wait until this blasted epidemic is over. \nI hope you're doing everything you can to end it.
 Why was the Termitary locked?
 Your father told me that the Termitary was closed on his orders. But he refused to explain his reasons.
 Fine, Burakh, since it's you who's asking.\nThe Termitary was closed because of a massive upcoming strike. And since our workforce is rather… special, it would have inevitably become a bloody, bestial riot. Do you follow me?
 Yes. A preventative measure?
 Go on.
 It was a stroke of luck that it happened right before the epidemic. The strict blockade of the Termitary became a quarantine. Now we can be sure that thirty percent of the whole Town is quite safe.
 Thirty percent? Did I hear you right?
 They are a wild people. They are restless. You know how prone they are to bouts of collective hysteria. It's like a dancing fever… or a laughing sickness. Like a flock of birds, if you will. \nIt's unfortunate the Termitary is packed so tight. Exacerbates the issue.
 Meaning?
 A fresh census is long overdue, but as far as I know, the Termitary shelters about five thousand people. Yes, the conditions are hard to bear. Crowding, poverty. But don't blame our family for that.
 I need to get in. Immediately.
 There's also a girl, Taya… Tycheek's daughter. I need to make sure she's all right.
 I need Oyun.
 You bewilder me, Burakh. You're a doctor, aren't you? You of all people should understand such things.\nRight now, the Termitary is an ark. A bastion of safety. Despite the riots, despite the crowds and the possible hunger. There is water, at least.\nCan you guarantee you won't carry the plague in on your boots?
 No… No, I can't.
 We have to think of something…
 You have no idea what you're talking about, Burakh. What did they tell you about the Termitary? That it's a prison?\nI built that behemoth of a bunkhouse after the wooden town burnt down. They're crammed together in there? Well, they weren't before! It's tight because… they're <i>breeding!</i> Do people breed when their conditions are poor? No… they die out! They'd have more space if they did, but they don't! Am I making my point clear?
 It's still a prison, though.
 Fine, let's drop the subject.
 Come on, don't shout. You'll have a stroke.
 There are people who want to move in there.
 No good, no good… It's crammed full as it is. Five thousand souls are… no joke, my boy.
 Well, I personally want to get inside too.
 Five thousand in a building that size? That's a torture chamber!
 Mother Boddho caress your step, yargachin. Have some coin. We've collected it; there's a lot. Tell them to let us into the Warren. We're scared.
 The Warren? You mean the Termitary?
 Why do you want to get in there?
 Tell them to let us in. Fat Vlad will listen to you. Take the money—just tell him yourself!
 He won't. Go back where you came from.
 I talked to him already. No use.
 All right. Give it to me. I'll try.
 Keep your money.
 It's foul. Cramped. Suffocating. Too high, too concrete. But safe.
 Are you hiding from the mob? They calmed down. Relax.
 What are you running from? The clay demon?
 Why speak of it? Evil is coming, yargachin. You know it too.\nInside lives Taya, Overseer Tycheek's daughter. She can protect us from any evil. No harm will befall the place where Mother Superior lives.
 I don't understand what you mean.
 What evil?
 A key to the secret shelter your good father used to cure people. He ordered me to relay it to you. Respectfully, I obey. Here is the key.
 He ordered you? When? He's… he's dead.
 Some secret if he invited people in. Any random stranger could know!
 What makes you think he's dead? People like Old Burakh are above death. They cannot be vanished. Take the key, and see for yourself.
 All right.
 I laid him to his final rest myself. Let us not cling to false hope.
 Indeed… Why does everyone call it secret, then? Perhaps it was only concealed from the people he wanted to hide his work from. Such as the powers that be. And us common people, we know everything.
 When did Father give you the key? He died three days ago!
 I wonder what kind of work needs to be hidden from The Powers That Be.
 Messenger
 Governor Saburov is in the Town Hall. He's in charge of Father's case.
 
 Governor Saburov is in the Town Hall. He's in charge of Father's case.
 If I don't hurry, Father will be laid to rest in the wrong way.
 Something incredible is happening at the Cemetery.
 
 What the hell is happening at the cemetery?
 Khan lives in the Polyhedron.
 
 Khan is in the Polyhedron.
 
 
 
 Taya Tycheek lives in a worker bunkhouse, the so-called Termitary.
 
 Taya Tycheek is the Termitary, a giant bunkhouse for our workers.
 "Udurgh" means "the body that contains a world." It refers to something that consists of many parts.
 
 "Udurgh" means "the body that contains a world." It refers to something that consists of many living parts.
 
 
 Udurgh means "the body that contains a world." It refers to something that consists of many living parts.
 Ene she yuun khun gheeshebshe? You have ears like a jerboa. Did you know you can catch shingles from a jerboa? Just like that.
 Well, you have ears like a mouse.
 And not just shingles.
 You're Taya Tycheek.
 My entire family is right here. And I'll have you know it's your family, too.
 Are you all fine? I mean, are you healthy?
 Myy uymen… I hate it here. They tell me all day long that I'm the most important person, yet they won't let me out. Won't let me play. Won't bring me anything I ask for.\nAnd they keep screaming and screaming through the walls! Who would want to live in such a place?
 Where's your father? Overseer Tycheek?
 How can I know that if they won't even let me out of this room? It's so, <i>so</i> boooring!\nAt least you got here, that's <i>something</i> new. And even that is only because I'm dreaming of you. Bou khara, bou shagna…
 It's good that they're not letting you out. It's safer that way.
 How come?
 Because we are the Kin. We are of the same blood. Of the same root. All children of Boddho, toonto nutag, aba ezhe… something something… That's what Dad says.\nAnd you've got a scratch on your cheek!
 But where's your dad?
 She yuunde ereebshe? Why did you come, anyway? You must have some sort of request for Our Not-So-Highness. I'm listening.
 I just wanted to make sure you're alive.
 What would you like to be brought, girl?
 I thought it was I who dreamed of you.
 Do you know who, or what, an "udurgh" is?
 Where's Foreman Oyun? Is he here with you?
 Follow the road by which bulls come to us from the steppe.\nMedeneghshe, now <i>that</i> was a great place to live. I'd like it sooo much to leave these ugly walls and move there. Life would become incredible. And it's so easy…
 Yeah, can't imagine any complications with that.
 Thanks, kid.
 Not to go on all-Fours; that is the Law. Are we not Men?
 Who are you?
 Our Mother Superior, joy of our people, long expected you. Speak, now, to me.
 Why you, though? I'll talk to her.
 It is all the same. Mother Superior has hundreds of eyes, ears, and hands. We are all one. This tongue is her tongue. These ears are her ears. I have long waited for you, guest. Speak. I will listen.
 I'd rather just listen.
 Not to suck up Drink; that is the Law. Are you not Men?
 I am.
 I'd rather look around.
 Mother Superior, joy of our people, wants you to lead us away into the steppe. We want to go home. \nHave you not heard her? She likes not this place. This evil cesspit overflows with ennui and misery.
 Why won't you let her out of her room?
 I want to inspect the Termitary.
 Impossible. It is dangerous out there.
 Why?
 Is this because of your riot? Are you still losing your minds?
 This is not to be spoken of. Or there will be punishment. Such is the Law.
 I hear screams. That means some people are alive out there. Comforting.
 Yeah, yeah. "Are you not Men?"
 So it <i>is</i> about the riot…
 I, Mother Superior, joy of our people, now grant you an audience. Have you seen already how the udurgh suffers without our care? Have you leaned against his ear? Have you tasted his humors? Or have you quenched his thirst?
 Where is he?
 No, I haven't seen him. Who's this "udurgh?"
 Everywhere.
 In here, too?
 It is a creature that contains the world within it. How else could I put it?
 How do I get to him?
 I've heard that already.
 You'll see for yourself if you go to the old village and look closely. Very closely.
 I've been there, back when I was a kid. It's empty.
 Look at what? The stars? The Lines are truly everywhere.
 Who is Lika?
 Oh, you mean the nice doggy boy I saw at the station? His name is Lika, huh?
 Well, I see you're all experienced burglars here.
 Sure. A train full of needles derailed outside my window. Happy now? \nWhy do you care? We barter 'cause we don't need pins anymore. We've outgrown 'em.
 You're all grown up, aren't you? Now listen up, kid. Only butchers are allowed cutting tools in this town. Got it?
 Scissors for a needle is a good trade. Deal.
 Trust me, kid, you don't.
 Are you a butcher?
 Sort of.
 By birth.
 I'm a surgeon. It's like a butcher, but with a sharper knife.
 And for a very good reason.
 List
 A list of names. The handwriting is clearly Father's. I need to touch this to read it.
 1. Sticky\n2. Capella\n3. Murky\n4. Notkin\n5. Khan\n6. Grace\n7. Taya Tycheek\n8. [unfamiliar steppe sigil]
 
 Home, sweet home welcomed me with its knives honed. What is that supposed to mean?
 Father's funeral will take place tomorrow at dawn. I'll hardly have a chance to pay respects to him until then.
 Don't be afraid. We're all on the same side for now. Aren't we?
 What is there to be afraid of?
 I know who you are. You're the kids from Father's list.
 We're all grateful to you. We know protecting us isn't easy, but you still do it. You make sure we live.
 There are seven of you. But there was an eighth on the list. Where is he?
 Here. For now. He's the udurgh.
 Is he behind that door?
 I can't see him.
 We think it's your father behind the door. But maybe the Eighth is transitioning already… Have you discovered who he is? We're curious too.
 Why?
 No, I don't know yet.
 What's behind the door?
 Because he's the udurgh. If he lives, so do we. If he begins to die, so will be.
 What's an udurgh?
 How do you know that word?
 I want to go back.
 You think you can't see the Eighth because you're looking the wrong way. But he's here. It's fortunate he's still on this side.
 Why?
 This door leads nowhere. There's just more of the same behind it.
 We don't know. And neither will you. We can't enter yet. Nor do we want to. No one does.
 Why is the Eighth nameless?
 I'll open it.
 
 
 A hospital has been set up in the town Theatre. Every doctor is there.
 Mark Immortell
 
 
 Theatre
 It hosts a hospital now. But the nightly shows still go on.
 Her scream, the poor thing… It must have hurt terribly. Could she… could she have been a person? Clay doesn't scream.
 Who was that? Who was burned?
 What have you done?!
 Hell if I know… They think it was the clay wench… The one who killed the old man. \nBut I guess it wasn't… Oh, poor sinners!
 What wench?
 What old man?
 You're crazy.
 Go away, go away! It's bad enough as is.
 I can't believe my eyes.
 "Welcome home, Artemy."
 Hazelnuts
 Can be munched down—with little effect. The kids here would sell their souls for a handful.
 The game goes like this: find a nut that has traveled far, guess its name, shake it, and listen to stories from the soul trapped inside.\n\nThis originated with the Polyhedron. We didn't play it as kids.
 Rumor has it, a bizarre creature was captured here.
 Something tells me Big Vlad and I have things to discuss.
 Steppe people gather at Aspity's hospice.
 Isidor Burakh
 Straight Razor
 Too wonky to be used as a weapon or surgical instrument, but kids love it.
 Ten years ago, local bandits used to call themselves "barbers" and brandish a particular style of razors as a mark of their identity. I wonder what became of that culture.
 When a person is done with their name, they discard it.
 Scrap Name
 People in this town are like a flight of birds, and birds don't require names. Individuality is overrated.
 Morphine
 Relieves fear and pain, leaving you drowsy and numb. If I take this before sleep, I'll recuperate better.
 A person is only alive for as long as they feel pain. No matter what Katerina Saburova does, she remains alive.
 Rusty Key
 Unlocks an abandoned room in the Factory. A useful find, since I'm now homeless…
 "Fingernail"
 The ferryman requires payment before he'll let me on the boat. This odd coin will do.
 Kids play "Mice and Guardians" with these. The rules of this game are unknown, but the rumors say they change every day.
 Neomycinum
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death.
 The best way to avoid infection is to be dead. Antibiotics, which lower infection at the cost of health in general, are the first step to the grave.
 Neomycinum (+)
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but significantly lowers the chance of death.
 The best way to avoid infection is to be dead. Antibiotics, which lower infection at the cost of health in general, are the first step to the grave. This one is an even better killer than the others.
 Ferromycinum
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death.
 The best way to avoid infection is to be dead. Antibiotics, which lower infection at the cost of health in general, are the first step to the grave.
 The best way to avoid infection is to be dead. Antibiotics, which lower infection at the cost of health in general, are the first step to the grave. This one is an even better killer than the others.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but significantly lowers the chance of death.
 Ferromycinum (+)
 Monomycinum
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death.
 The best way to avoid infection is to be dead. Antibiotics, which lower infection at the cost of health in general, are the first step to the grave.
 The best way to avoid infection is to be dead. Antibiotics, which lower infection at the cost of health in general, are the first step to the grave. This one is an even better killer than the others.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but significantly lowers the chance of death.
 Monomycinum (+)
 Cloth Mask
 Covers the face.
 This mask resembles those worn by medical personnel, but instead of sterile gauze, it's made of dirty cloth, and instead of clinging tightly to my face, it hangs loose. Frankly, it's just a rag with two ties.
 Cloak
 Rough cloth that can be used as protective cover, if I'm ever that desperate.
 I'd love to make a tent from this and tell folks scary stories about imaginary catastrophies.
 Cloth Gloves
 For doing dirty work.
 <i>"How does one call upon menkhu, the faithful of the Kin? Know them by their hands, for they are butchers…"</i>
 Army Cloak
 Protects against infection during contact. Won't hide you from death.
 The 4th Division was relocated here by accident. They never wanted to kill their compatriots among the plague. They were planning to do in in the trenches.
 Army Boots
 Protect against contaminated air. Of exceptional quality.
 <i>"Many a place remains on the face, // where people who shoot are yet to set foot." -N.A.</i>
 Tan
 A tasty dairy drink. Satisfies hunger, quenches thirst.
 The Kin once told me the best tan is made during thunderstorms, or by swearing at the milk as harsh as you can. I tried every cuss in the book, but I never learned the art very well.
 Aspity
 Aspity
 Victor Kain
 Georgiy Kain
 I don't think you recognized me. I'm a Burakh.
 Restless One
 Executor
 Executor
 Carouser
 Vigilante
 For you, emshen. Heart, liver, kidneys. They still smell of life.
 Why would I need these?
 You're nuts.
 You've killed someone and cut them open, odongh. Is that so?
 Make potions, as your father. Cures from grief, poison, envy, aches. He made any cure when he had good meat. This is good meat. Take it.
 I don't need these.
 This is punishable by death. Don't you know?
 Only a menkhu can cut a body. Is there a menkhu among you?
 Yes, emshen. We do not pity ourselves. Burakh-esegher is already there. We'll follow behind him, then arrive, then be companions. We are content to do this. \nSegne dehe, take these. You'll save many lives.
 What makes you think I need these?
 You do need these, yargachin. Real potions have meat, unente. \nHerbs have borders. Your great father used more than herbs. He made cures from blood and flesh, from those alive.
 But what does it have to do with me?
 What kind of cures?
 No, yargachin. We have broken the law. Those who do not know the Lines cannot cut bodies. We will give our lives, mine and Kooseh. No others.
 But why?
 These are a gift, so you don't risk your life. Don't cut the living unless there is need. Don't cut the dead unless there is need. Even if you're a good menkhu, Boddho does not like it. \nBetter we suffer than you.
 Bayarlaa. I accept your gift, and your sacrifice.
 If my medicine ever needs organs, I'll get them myself. Remember that, and tell the others.
 Fat Vlad is right. You're a bunch of beasts.
 Any kind. Cures for pain, cures for fever, cures for the inner fire. Cures for all three Layers of the body. \nThose who know the Lines can cure any disease with guts and herbs. This is how the world works.
 I'm not Father. I can't make those kinds of cures. Take these organs back.
 So it's a universal method? Curious…
 How do you know about the three Layers?
 Skin. Blood. Thin threads. Your father treated with those.
 …Nerves. Those "threads" are called nerves.
 …Yet he sent me away to learn from those with different views.
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Nyespa is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Nyespa is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Nyespa is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 This antibiotic straightens the Wind Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Wind Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Wind Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Wind Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Bile Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Bile Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Bile Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Bile Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Phlegm Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Phlegm Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Phlegm Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Phlegm Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Phlegm Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Wind Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Wind Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Bile Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 This antibiotic straightens the Bile Nyespa, prolonging life. But administering it to a patient with a different malady will only hurt them. Only one antibiotic can be administered per day.
 Didn't we tell you? We used to play a game of "sand pest." Meaning we needed to make medicine, right? So the kids who played it ground pills together and mixed the powders.\nRumor has it, one mixture really did work. But no one remembers which one. The kids who made it have long since grown up.
 Okay. Thank you for this gift.
 They mixed pills together? Sounds like a recipe for disaster.
 \n…Y'know what? Have your poison back. I don't need it.
 It can kill you, for sure. They say it's like lighting a coal fire in your belly—makes your stomach bleed. But it does cure the sand pest, got it?
 Got it.
 Weird… but sure, let's roll with it.
 You children play some strange games.
 Have you eaten the shmowder? C'mon, hurry up.
 I have. Thanks.
 Hold your horses. What's this stuff anyway?
 Isn't it too precious to share with me?
 Why would you give me something so rare?
 I have no choice. One must keep a clean conscience. You taught us that murder is wrong, didn't you?
 So what exactly does this stuff do?
 You told us it's fine to kill bad people, didn't you? So I'm silencing my own conscience, I guess. Asking for forgiveness in advance.
 I see. So what exactly does this stuff do?
 And who is it that you plan on killing, boy?
 None of your business, big guy. No one, perhaps.
 So what's in the box?
 Hurry up and take it. Time is of the essence.
 I already have.
 It's fine. I'll keep it for a while.
 Whatever. We'll find a use for it, of course. I did offer it to you though, so my conscience is clean.
 Yeah. You keep it that way.
 Fine, I've changed my mind. I'll keep it.
 
 
 
 This track is an umbilical cord. Our only connection to the outside world.
 How old are you, kid?
 It does resemble that. I thought about it, too.
 Six, if Mother is not mistaken. But I'm not sure. I'm worse with numbers than words.
 Yeah. You speak like you're thirty.
 I've noticed. You two are weird.
 This umbilical cord needs to be cut. Quickly. Sand pest flows through it. And a special emissary will arrive soon. A state inquisitor. Heard of those?
 Of course I have. We could use one, these days.
 I thought they were disbanded two years ago.
 No. This emissary will signal our doom. As we sentence the outside world, so will the inquisitor sentence us. But they're faster. Get it? The umbilical cord needs to be cut. \nPerhaps you can do it? You're a surgeon, after all.
 You mean like… blow it up?
 No. I'm a different kind of surgeon.
 Sure, as an example. I'm not an expert. I'm only six, after all.\nJust destroy the rails. Or we're all dead. State emissaries have no sense of humor. Maybe a scalpel will do? Just cut and be done with it.
 What, the rails? I'd just blunt the blade.
 A contraption would serve better. I think I know just the man…
 I'm trying to divine who it will be. A man or woman? If a man… there will be blood, but it'll be easier for you to prevail, in the end. If a woman… less of our blood, more of yours. That's what my flowers tell me.
 Who are you talking about, kid?
 Heh. Those are some thoughtful flowers.
 We're expecting guests. Bad guests. Violent. So I'm asking my flowers if we'll survive. They're not sure…
 Come on. Our town is hospitable. We honor old traditions.
 It doesn't take a flower to predict our chances of survival.
 I know a good obstetrician, all right… He'll cut whatever needs to be cut, including railroads.
 Taya Tycheek
 I don't know what happened to Father's body. I guess they burned him. I wasn't there.
 
 In his letter, Father said that he is to face a grave trial. Or was it "us"? I don't remember…
 You can either buy daily bread or barter for it… There's always burglary, too.
 
 I've met a funny dog-eared kid at the Station. What was he doing there?
 If I don't find a place to hit the cot, I'll become dead tired. Perhaps literally. 
 
 The dog killer is the doghead who saw me at dawn. He could testify to my alibi. But I gave Notkin my word. The murderer will be tried.
 The Gorkhon water is polluted. To quench thirst, I'll have to search for water barrels and fountains.
 
 
 
 
 
 Sometimes a whole can be more than a sum of its parts, and it can have special properties that the individual components don't.
 
 
 I can brew medicine from herbs, water, and human organs. All kinds of medicine. Including the kinds I can't buy.
 Medicine can be made from herbs, water, and human insides. Various kinds of medicine, including ones that can't be bought in stores.
 
 Medicine can be made from herbs, water, and human insides. Various kinds of medicine, including ones that can't be bought in stores.
 
 
 A cure for this vicious thing can be made, no matter what anyone says. It <i>must</i> be made.
 
 
 The bacteria live in infected organs. Meaning I can extract a serum from them.\n\nA tincture mixed with an <b>infected organ.</b> I'll have to get them on my own... from infected bodies. And I'll have to try different organs.
 My master, Vlad Olgimsky, humbly requests your presence. It concerns a most urgent matter.
 Humbly? Doesn't sound like Fat Vlad.
 Too bad. I'm busy enough as it is.
 Tell him I'll come by as soon as I have the time.
 Apologies, I should have been more clear. My master is the younger Olgimsky. Younger for now, anyway.
 Ah, that changes everything.
 You think Fat Vlad's days are numbered? He'll outlive us all yet.
 I can't. I'm busy.
 Olgimsky Jr. wants to see me.
 It is good that you listen, yargachin. Do you know how we Worms came into being?
 You simply spawned from the Earth.
 Mother Boddho made you out of what was left over after making humans.
 You mean according to legend? Same way the Shabnak did. The Earth molds you out of her innards, and spits you out.
 That is right. Our nature is twofold. We're part Earth, part flesh. That is why we possess properties of the Earth, shүү dee. What is no threat to Earth, is no threat to us.
 But you do also possess the weaknesses of flesh, no?
 Quite a deal you've got there. What could possibly threaten the Earth itself?
 We took some properties of flesh, yes? And some from Earth. Joined, they became something new. We've learned to sense herbs. We've learned to understand cattle. We are unaffected by a disease that Earth created.
 Yes, a whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Always.
 What makes you think the disease comes from the Earth?
 Where else? All grows from Earth. When she is joyous, she fills the fields with twyre. When she is irate, she makes shabnak, pits, and disease. Those do not affect us. We are one with Earth.
 So, the usual… Whatever happens, it's Mother Boddho doing it.
 No. You haven't convinced me.
 That's… possible.
 
 
 I brewed… something. But did I choose the right organ?\n\nI need to test this cure on an infected person. Sometimes, infected people just lie on the ground in infected districts. But someone I know by name can serve as a test subject too.
 
 
 An infected brain can be brewed into an antibiotic. It weakens the disease, but does not kill it.\n\nIt's no panacea.
 
 
 An infected heart can be brewed into an antibiotic. It weakens the disease, but does not kill it.\n\nIt's no panacea.
 
 
 Infected kidneys can be brewed into an antibiotic. It weakens the disease, but does not kill it.\n\nIt's no panacea.
 
 
 An infected liver can be brewed into an antibiotic. It weakens the disease, but does not kill it.\n\nIt's no panacea.
 
 
 Infected blood can be brewed into an antibiotic. It weakens the disease, but does not kill it.\n\nIt's no panacea.
 An infected brain produces an antibiotic, too. Still not a panacea.
 An infected heart produces an antibiotic, too. Still not a panacea.
 An infected kidney produces an antibiotic, too. Still not a panacea.
 An infected liver produces an antibiotic, too. Still not a panacea.
 Infected blood produces an antibiotic, too. Still not a panacea.
 
 
 Wrong. Trying out infected tissue leads nowhere. I need to think outside the box here.
 
 
 I'm trying to follow the principles they taught me in medical school. But Dankovsky's education is better—and he gets nowhere. My strength lies in the lore obscure to others.\n\nThe answer is in the steppe.
 
 
 Is it true that bulls never get infected with sand pest?
 
 
 Vlad Olgimsky wants to see me. A dubious success.
 Lara Ravel
 
 
 
 
 Where go you, friend? What plan is next to follow?
 I plan to go on with my life.
 Actually, I don't know what to do.
 Where should I go? What should I start with?
 I want to leave. This town has nothing else to offer me.
 What say the townsfolk?
 The townsfolk?
 Who cares about their babbling…
 They're so alike, aren't they? A backdrop, faceless… They surely know nothing important—right?\nA hive, a swarm, a flock: no use for names. Whatever one knows, they shall all know in turn. 
 Why should I care?
 A hive? A swarm? A flock?
 The crowd is but a many-headed beast. Like it or not: You are but one such head. They know you better than you know yourself. Have you heard them, Burakh? Communication: See how it means finding a common ground?
 Oh yeah, they were eager to communicate with me yesterday. My ears are still ringing.
 I can feel it. Kind of slimy to the touch.
 Sounds unpleasant. A mouthful.
 They all know something of your tale, Burakh. And from each one, a different strand of it. Some know where you're to go. Others, will say why you must go. And some will warn of danger, terrible danger, that you may avoid it.
 So I'm the only one who knows nothing.
 But you said they're a swarm, all alike.
 Untrue! Grown-ups will know what children don't. And children know what steppe Kin do not. Such is the mechanism of life, that turns in its own petty pace from day to day. You choose only whose lips reach your raised ears.
 I'm used to only relying on myself.
 That is because you are alone, Burakh. Confused, alone, losing the plot, Burakh! Does not the map of your own mind suffice? Then talk! Communicate.\nHere, hear me now: Teensies and tots, the town's own young, indeed already know who waits for you today. If you still doubt: Then speak to one. Any child.
 I don't like children.
 No one's lips. I don't care for gossip.
 I guess I should go looking for a child…
 But what should I do exactly? Where should I go next?
 Talk to the crowd, Burakh! To faceless folk, all so alike in their great numbers. Hear them: the buzzing swarm, the squawking flock—the scent, the trail you seek is there in what they say. For life is what they talk about. \nAnd see, Burakh, a doctor's path is too about life.
 They talk about so many things…
 They're too fickle. They say one thing at dawn, and another at dusk.
 Khatangher
 Rusty Key
 And a note. Signed "V. O." To read it, I need to touch it.
 "I've found a spare key, but these key thefts (?) are becoming concerning. Your equipment is far from cheap, is it not? It would serve no one if it gets stolen.\n\nAnd do keep in mind that if our small arrangement is uncovered, I too will have to bear the consequences.\n\n-V. O."
 Simple townsfolk know more than it seems. If I'm unsure what to do, I should talk to them. \n\nI've been told that young kids may be of interest to me right now.
 
 Simple townsfolk know more than it seems. If I'm unsure what to do, I should talk to them. \n\nI've been told that young kids may have information for me.
 The streets are empty. An alarm bell is tolling. The sound comes from the Town Hall.
 Prompter
 The cemetery caretaker's daughter. She looks after the dead herself now, since twyrine did her dad in.
 Looks after the dead?
 Yeah. Twyrine is an evil concoction.
 There you are.
 Here I am.
 How old are you?
 Eight, soon. Five for now.
 Keep growing, then. Don't slow down.
 Got anything interesting to say?
 You need to see Capella. Soon, soon, soon.
 I was on my way.
 Soon? Why?
 Because.
 Short and to the point.
 I'd give you candy, but I'm all out…
 Who is Capella?
 Our mom. Big Vlad's daughter—my dad works at his Factory, you know.
 Why do I need to see her?
 Sorry about your father…
 My, my, my, what have we here? A real cure? To drive me out of the body?
 Hopefully.
 We'll see about that. Soon.
 So that's what it is? Thanks for the hint!
 You are just like your foolish father. Following in his footsteps. Doing what he did, five years ago.
 Really? Did he also make a panacea?
 What did he do?
 I'm very happy to follow his path.
 He did not let me into the Town. Boarded off the Crude Sprawl. It burned out from the inside, to the last soul. With no food, I starved to death. And so the Town returned to its unknowing slumber.
 Sounds like a job well done.
 Cruel. My solution is more humane.
 That was a long time ago. He then had time to think of what happened. To understand that one should not drive me away… Neither from a town, nor from a body.\nI am a heavenly gift, Burakh! Will you also take five years to understand it? You hold poison in your hands!
 Just admit it: You're scared.
 Yes, it is. To poison you.
 In five years, perhaps I will regret this. For now, step aside.
 An incredibly reputable source has informed me that I need to see Capella, Olgimsky's daughter.
 
 An incredibly reputable source has informed me that I need to see Capella, Olgimsky's daughter.
 
 
 It feels like the cure for this pest can only be made from a minotaur. A chimera. Half-human, half-bull. \n\nWhere would I find such a creature?
 
 
 Dankovsky's findings support my own suspicions: common bulls are useless to us. \n\nI'm glad we agree. It doesn't help, though.
 
 No vaccine yet… Another fruitless attempt. But there must be a solution to this problem! There must!
 I guess.
 You look exhausted, erdem. Get some sleep. Twyre is in bloom.
 Tell that to Rubin. He doesn't sleep at all—though, he's well aware of that twyre of yours.
 Is he, I wonder?
 Anyway, how's it going? Any progress?
 I got something. Bulls can't get infected.
 I will if I get a chance. It's like he has a death wish.
 None.
 The whole bull thing… I had one delivered to me. I injected it with a strain, intending to collect a blood sample the next day. But the beast disappeared in the night! Any idea who could be behind it?
 Here, take a look. A sample of bull blood.
 No, I don't.
 If you get a new one, have it guarded.
 …Are you a mind reader?
 Sometimes. A bit.
 Are you sure? I had the same line of thinking. At least that's the first thing I checked.
 And?
 No, I'm not sure. That's why I came to you.
 No. It's just that you have experience with this. You're a scientist. I'm a surgeon.
 Leave it with me, I'll study it. Will only take a few hours. While I'm busy, you may hit the cot over there, by the folding screen. You need it. I've seen corpses prettier than you.
 I can't. I have a lot on my plate. I'll just drop by later.
 All right. Thanks, erdem.
 Well, seems like you were right. But it's of no use to either of us.
 Why is that?
 Indeed, they produce antibodies. A lot of them. But they're useless to us.
 Tell me more.
 How well are you versed in raw sample hyperimmunization for xenogeneic serums? Do you know how immunoglobulins are extracted from a native serum?
 No.
 Say it once more, slowly.
 We didn't learn that in any of my courses.
 Sand pest evolves and mutates in human blood. Fast. It doesn't do that in bulls. It's as though bulls are of no interest to it. But their antibodies <i>could</i> theoretically be useful…
 But?
 Unless the disease is weakened, we can't inject a person with those antibodies. It's too risky. Children, for example, definitely wouldn't survive the procedure. We're too different from bulls.\nMeaning what we need is…
 …A minotaur. A creature that combines man and bull.
 You want me to wait while you find a way to weaken the disease? No way.
 So it's a dead end. I see. Thanks, erdem.
 So bulls are indeed immune to sand pest?
 Maybe to you, erdem. Not to me.
 Of no interest, you say? …Wait a second!
 What?
 No, nothing. Just thinking…
 Artemy Burakh?
 Well?
 Wrong door.
 Aglaya Lilich, a State Inquisitor and Commissar for Critical Emergencies, has arrived in town. She has chosen the Cathedral as her base of operations.\nAs one person responsible for the current situation, you have been invited to a meeting. Immediately.
 <i>I'm</i> responsible for everything that's happening here?
 Immediately? Doesn't sound like an invitation. More like a notice of interrogation.
 Perhaps.
 I don't like this…
 All right. I'll go.
 The sick are my first priority. The Inquisitor will have to wait.
 Artemy Burakh, no one cares what you want. The Inquisitor plans to solve the current crisis in under a day.
 The cows that bellow loudest give the least milk.
 No… what was the name, Burakh? She's no <i>cow.</i> She's a wolf. Got it?
 Wipe the drool up, will you? Or did the Inquisitor appoint you her personal bootlicker?
 If that's so, there must be a line all the way to her office, with or without me.
 Got it.
 I guess I might as well take a look at this miracle.
 <i>Immediately.</i>
 Piss off.
 Heard you loud and clear.
 This will be a long conversation. You must pay complete attention.\nYou don't need to tell the truth, but lying will have consequences. Ready?
 Well, I'd like to take a seat first. Looks like I'm in for something interesting.
 So this is what you inquisitors are like. Not what I expected.
 To face the consequences? I am.
 I don't have to tell the truth? How so?
 Lies are much more informative, even if the truth saves us both time. Shall we begin?
 I think we already have.
 You're the one in charge.
 Are you that cynical, or that brave? You don't seem like a fool.
 That is not for me to judge.
 I am, first and foremost, exhausted. We've seen too much over the last week to be afraid of you.
 Have you already begun the questioning?
 Let us start with the classic problem.\nWould you push an obnoxious fat man in front of a trolley to keep four children from being run over?
 I would.
 I would not.
 This is not a problem. It is a provocation.
 I see.\nQuestion two. Soldiers are about to execute your two daughters. If you offer them one voluntarily, they will only shoot her. If you refuse to cooperate, they will shoot both.\nYour move?
 Look, why are you asking me this? It's not what you really called me here to talk about.
 I can't make such a choice unless I am truly facing this situation, God forbid.
 They'll kill everyone anyway. I won't cooperate.
 I'll choose one.
 I have no daughters. Should we maybe get down to business?
 …You are an intriguing man, Artemy Burakh. Your speech has a unusual cadence to it. A rare thing, indeed.\nBut I believe I have now attuned myself to you. Do you know why I am here?
 I can guess.
 I've been told you are well versed in the local lore and medicine, with its unusual beliefs about the human body. I've been told you are working on a cure for the disease.\nAnd as there can be no cure, this is merely sabotage, am I correct?
 I <i>have</i> made a cure. Here it is.
 And who told you that, I wonder?
 Words, words, words.
 So can a cure be produced, or not?
 It can. I guess.
 I don't know.
 I'm starting to suspect it can't. It would require a creature that does not exist.
 I've also been informed he was a close friend of yours.
 He was.
 Rubin died tonight. Have you not heard?
 I only know he's dead, nothing more.
 Do you know what happened to him?
 How did he die?
 It doesn't matter, now. What matters is why he sent the sample on your behalf rather than his own.
 No idea.
 This is… not unexpected.
 He was acting a bit strange, of late.
 I think he wanted to make up for his… outburst.
 Passing the torch to me, so to speak.
 …I am impressed. The coincidence is so perfect, it's uncanny.\nBurakh, you… managed to surprise me. Did you test it?
 I did. It works.
 Not yet.
 A cure for the sand pest changes… many things. Thousands of life and death questions, of which I am now interested in… four.\nNow I need the recipe, and access to the ingredients. Show me.
 Which four lives are you concerned with?
 …Burakh, are you mad? I don't believe you fully comprehend who I am, or what is happening right now. Is that so?
 I guess.
 I don't have a recipe.
 Ingredients will be an issue. I don't know where to get them.
 I don't care.
 Let's deal with the epidemic first, bicker later.
 What is this sample made of?
 Blood, mostly. Herbal tinctures, but those are secondary. We're lucky it's September. Twyre is in bloom.
 Infected human blood?
 No. I don't know whose blood it is.
 …If I didn't just <i>hear</i> you, Burakh, I'd assume you were trying to make fun of me. Allow me to reciprocate, then.\nDid you know that the whole ordeal with divining your fate is more than mere mystical nonsense? Your fate has been… amputated. I can tell that, for certain.
 Perhaps. I don't really care.
 What do you mean? Are you that apathetic? Or is it that you simply don't understand how painful it is to remain a puppet in the hands of those more powerful than you?
 I act on what I believe is my duty. If someone tries to use my actions to their own ends, I don't care.
 I always try to do the right thing. I don't care if someone orchestrates it. The heart is smarter than the brain.
 …You're a fool.\nAlthough, perhaps… you're not the fool here. Go. This conversation is over.
 So there will be more at some point? Looking forward to it.
 …Do I see a hint of tears?
 Town Hall
 Isidor Burakh's House
 One of Grief's boys got stabbed. Something tells me he deserved it. I don't have time for this.
 
 I came into my legacy… sort of. I traced Father's path. I will take care of his patients. I've proven by deeds that I know the Lines.\n\nFrankly, I was acting at random. Got lucky, I suppose.\n\nBut everyone still considers me a menkhu.
 I came into my legacy… sort of. I traced Father's path. I tried to take care of his patients… unsuccessfully. \n\nBut everyone still considers me a menkhu now.
 The high and the mighty of this town have finally taken notice of a Burakh. The witch hunt is over. \n\nI can now go out safely.
 I had no plans to lift a finger for that scum, but it's hard to let someone suffer. In the end, I did help Piecework.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Screw you.
 Are you sad?
 What do you care?
 I am.
 I haven't got time to be sad.
 I just wanted you to know: I sympathize. I've never had parents. I've never had anyone… So I know how terribly awful it must feel right now.
 If you never had parents, then you don't.
 I don't need your sympathy.
 What do you want from me?
 I'm sorry I said mean things to you. That's why you think I'm evil, isn't it? But it was the truth.
 It's fine. I don't hold a grudge.
 Get lost.
 What do you want?
 I just wanted you to know that the girl from the cemetery—Grace—is talking to your father right this moment. And I think it strains her a great deal.
 You're lying.
 Are you messing with me again?
 She is…?
 They're speaking. And I think it's killing her… Could you tell her to stop? Please? I think she might listen to you. I feel sorry for her—do you understand?
 This can't be true.
 No, you don't.
 Right this moment, you say?
 Right this moment.
 I don't believe you.
 And he's responding?
 Yes, it can.
 Get lost.
 Is she sitting by his grave or something?
 Why won't you believe I'm a good person, Burakh?! Open your eyes! I speak the truth! Remember, I'm always speaking the truth!
 Fine. I'll take a look. But if it turns out you lied to me…
 You deranged lunatic…
 Why linger? Don't get sidetracked. You have a duty. You have the list. Go back.
 Who are you?
 I like it here better.
 We're watching. Observing. No time for games, now. We must watch.
 Watch what?
 You don't have to. Go home.
 Which of them will enter the door first? I think it will be the older girl. Not the boy in a collar. 
 No one's going anywhere.
 Relax. I'll go first.
 Your place is all dirty.
 Look who's talking. When was the last time you took a bath?
 Isidor's son. Artemy, is that right? Or is it Ersher?
 No, Ersher was my older brother. He died young. I'm Artemy.
 Does it matter?
 Have you come to present yourself to the Mistress? It's taken long enough. I don't believe this is a courtesy visit. That means you have a request.\nSpeak.
 I thought your house had troubles.
 That street rat, Clara, said you were in need of help.
 I don't have any requests. Maybe you have something to ask of me?
 Ha! Now this is funny.
 What's funny?
 So you're all right?
 I'm fine. Healthy and strong enough.\nBut my husband could benefit from your help. He requires your counsel, but is too proud to ask. Alexander would rather bear all on his shoulders than distract you from your work. Could you speak to him?
 You care for him so much… Though, it makes sense.
 I'll speak to him. Is he at the Town Hall?
 Yes, at the Town Hall… Or maybe in his half of the house… I'm not certain. I haven't seen him in a while. Yes, quite a while… Almost a day.
 Really? That's strange.
 Perhaps, if I have the time.
 Very well.
 I'm glad I paid you a visit, Katerina. I'm starting to understand this house.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Anna Angel… Something bad is happening at her place.
 
 
 One can't throw away bad fortune, or cut it off. But it can be traded. For a spindle, in Anna Angel's case.
 
 
 
 Anna Angel. I traded her bad fortune away from her… but it's not so easy to get rid of a guilty conscience.
 Katerina, are you sick?
 I have a weak heart, but that's nothing.
 May I examine you, just in case?
 I'll be going, then.
 Ah, Burakh. If you've grown weary of your medical duties and seek to join the town guard, you'll leave disappointed. Your expertise would be wasted on the streets. \nNot to mention we're almost out of leather caps.
 I'm used to disappointment.
 Good to see you've kept your sense of humor.
 So what brings you here today? The hunt for the urchin that carries the plague? \nIf so, don't bother—my porch is already packed with volunteers. Pockets full of matches and kindling leave no room for common sense.
 What urchin?
 That's okay, I've brought my own.
 Are they planning another burning?
 I'm here to check on you. You're clearly overworked.
 Don't bother, I'm fine. Everyone is overworked these days. You, Rubin, Dankovsky… All the <i>actual</i> workers, unlike those layabouts outside.\nI could use your help with another matter.
 With those layabouts, I assume?
 Never thought I'd hear praise from you.
 They showed up this morning, claiming to have found the carrier. A homeless little girl, clearly infected, but nonetheless alive and well.\nI know perfectly well what urchin they mean! Be assured, she has nothing to do with this.
 How can I help?
 You're a doctor. They'll trust you more than me. Tell them they're mistaken. Better yet, if they capture her, they can't hurt her. Without her, we're doomed. Isn't that right? Dankovsky told me that, about his vaccine project.
 That's right. I'll tell them to stay their hands.
 Little? Clearly not your… ward, if that's who you're talking about.
 Exactly. They're agitating over nonsense. Someone has to calm them down.
 How exactly?
 Little… little urchin… Wait! That's not Clara, that's another girl!
 What? Which girl?
 I mean… Maybe. Just a thought.
 Never mind.
 I'll remind them of the shabnak hunt and how <i>that</i> went.
 Let them riot. There's no stopping them.
 Why don't you tidy it up, then? Shouldn't be too hard.
 I don't have time. Too busy.
 Busy with what?
 Me too, little one.
 I got a new friend. A talking friend.
 Really? A talking one?
 That's good. It's always nice to have a friend.
 Like a doll?
 No, not a doll.
 Then who?
 She's a secret friend. I don't know why, but she doesn't like you at all.
 Most people don't.
 Just like you, huh.
 Well, I won't pry into your secrets.
 I dunno… Maybe I could be sort of a daughter to you.
 Oh, that's new. Didn't you say you don't like me?
 No, I don't think I could handle a daughter right now.
 Um, well. You're not as bad as your daddy.
 Why are you saying he's bad?
 What do you mean, "sort of"?
 Sort of.
 Don't you trust me?
 No. I'm much worse.
 …
 Well?
 You're a glum little kid, aren't you?
 That's what my friend says. She knows everything in the whole world because she can sneak into any tiny little hole.
 Who is that friend of yours, anyway?
 Maybe I'll introduce you. She asks about you a lot, but doesn't want to meet you yet.
 You do that.
 I'm not so eager, either.
 Any little hole? That's convenient.
 My friend told me she's ready to meet you. That's what she said, she did.
 Who is your friend, Murky? Is she human?
 No. 
 Then what?
 I can't tell.
 How does she talk to you, kiddo?
 Inside.
 Then how can I meet her?
 My friend said that if you come to the Crow Stone at night, she'll show herself.
 Tell her I will be there.
 I have a bad feeling about this friend of yours.
 Why not the graveyard, then? No. You go keep your friend company.
 I don't have time for games, Murky. Can't you see I'm busy making a cure?
 That's why she wants to see you. She's scared.
 Scared of what?
 That friend of yours… Is she so sneaky because people are looking for her?
 Why is she afraid of me, Murky?
 This is troubling… Tell her we can meet.
 Those angry women in your yard… Have you seen them?
 If not for the plague, the entire Town would crowd my yard. They all despise me, you know. Little by little, they encroach on all I hold dear.\nNo matter. You're a doctor, aren't you?
 Yes, I am.
 I'm not here for medical reasons.
 …You're a strong person.
 It's good you've come, Burakh. We require medical assistance, and this time I can't rely on that troublesome Dankovsky.
 Weren't you two getting along?
 "We"?
 He is too… rational for the problem at hand.
 Yeah, I know what you mean.
 In our town, that's an advantage.
 My wife is very ill, Burakh. I'm not sure how to help her.
 What's wrong with her?
 She seems to be losing her mind. She… she is obsessed with… things. Strange things.
 Go on. I'll keep this confidential.
 Katerina believes she cares for our town as if she were… some mystical ruler. She is delirious.\nI think she… communicates with <i>something,</i> some being.
 What kind of being?
 I see. I'll take a look at her.
 I'm not used to speaking about these matters. My mind tells me she is imagining it, but at times, I can hear it respond to her.\nYet, when I enter her room, I find her sitting alone on the bed, and I can't muster the courage to speak to her.
 I understand. I'll examine her.
 It's hard to speak about these things.
 It's impossible for one person to help another.
 I'm a surgeon, not a head doctor.
 
 Prompter
 Look 'round, Burakh, at this abandoned house.
 What about it?
 Of course it's abandoned. Those thugs wouldn't be here otherwise.
 Prompter
 
 Prompter
 Prompter
 Have you secured all you need to survive?
 I've got nothing I need. Neither food, nor water, nor clothes.
 I'm managing, for now.
 I hardly urge that you mimic those two. But times are dire; and what you need, you may find lurking in empty houses such as these.\nAnd if the owners should return abruptly… You were neither first nor last criminal here.
 So you say I should burgle this place?
 You mean to say I could pin the blame on those two. Right?
 Exactly. 'tis your life at stake; and things are merely things, that you might then repay. You are, indeed, a doctor here, Burakh. 
 Quite so. A doctor, not a burglar.
 So you're like my inner voice, huh? And it's not my conscience speaking.
 Fair enough.
 Something's wrong here.
 
 Your wife considers herself a Mistress. She's supposed to see things no one else does.
 Do you know, Burakh, where a Mistress' power comes from? The prophetic dreams, her influence over others, keeping the Town in balance…
 I don't. Tell me.
 I can see that you're suffering.
 I am suffering—that is true. From pain. From sleepless nights. From impotence.\nRecently, I felt a glimmer of hope that my suffering was at an end. But I was mistaken. There is no hope.
 Why?
 A glimmer of hope? From what?
 The power of a Mistress stems from the earth, and only from the earth, no matter what Nina may have said. \nThe only true power is in the earth. It feeds us all. We grow as grass in the field, and breathe in its spirit.
 There are other powers out there.
 The earth is just soil. Nothing more.
 We're all bound to Earth.
 All these years, I couldn't find the key. I was deaf and weak.\nIt's like musical talent—without it, one can hear, but cannot play. One without the gift cannot take up a melody started by another.
 I don't have an ear for music either.
 All gifts are like that. Surgery, too—each body has its own feeling.
 But recently, the earth started to respond. The tiny people living underground. Mice and rats… and worms, worms too, but mice are more reliable. Rats, they're just like us. Their intelligence equals ours.
 Are you all right?
 You're raving. You need rest.
 The earth and rats are different beings. Don't confuse one for the other.
 And how do you know that? What do you even know about these matters? When the earth must speak to people, it will take any form it wants!
 Calm down. I believe you.
 The Kin say that in these cases the earth makes shabnaks.
 Earth has no mouth, no ears. I see why my past attempts were fruitless.\nBut it took pity on me. It speaks through its herald—to me. He comes to me. Tells me truths. Truths a Mistress must know. All as it should be.
 What does it tell you?
 Could it be your inner voice?
 No.
 Does it talk to you about your fears?
 He says the sand pest and the earth are one and the same. That means there is no salvation.\nWe are bound to the earth. We walk it, we breathe it in, we eat its fruits, we cannot escape it. Our bond is inseverable. He's right. All signs confirm it.
 It might be your inner voice, Katerina.
 Does it ask questions? It's important that you tell me.
 It is the voice of your fear.
 But the disease appeared only recently. The earth has been here forever.
 Ah, I don't know. I don't know anything.\nHere he comes again. He wants to speak to me, but I don't want to! I'm scared, Artemy. When I heard his voice, I began to believe in my power.\nBut now I see this power is useless.
 You need to get some sleep. Sound sleep will help.
 There's no one in this room but us.
 What do you want to hear, human?
 Does the plague really come from the earth?
 Human.
 Rat.
 …What kind of creature <i>are</i> you?
 I'm not.
 What are you, then?
 Someone pinch me.
 A thing of shadow. A thing of the depths. A thing of Earth, flesh of her warm flesh. I know the answers. You don't even know the questions. What seek you within me?
 Happiness, I guess… Same as everyone.
 Truth.
 I'm just seeking you.
 Everything comes from the earth. You came from it, as well, and will return in time. Is coming from the earth so great a crime that one must burn for it?
 Not necessarily.
 What kind of creature are you?
 I am not a creature. You do not know how to ask the right questions.
 Are you the voice of the earth?
 Why are you torturing this woman?
 This woman tortures herself. She calls for me, I arrive. She questions, I answer. Our business is not yours.
 You told Katerina the plague and the earth are one and the same. How so?
 If I kill as many as the sand pest? Yes.
 Teach me, then.
 Here, the earth is still alive. Truly alive. You should know better than most—if you remember your pitiful childhood, of course.\nAll living things resist death. Do you understand?
 But sand pest is death itself.
 I don't.
 Time after time, I'm amazed by humans—the naivety, the conceit. You consider yourselves the crown of creation. That alone puts you above help.\nAny mouse understands its place better than your sorry species.
 Not all of us.
 Only a handful of you think differently—like this unusually sensitive woman. But even they are not prepared to confront that which they seek. The truth snaps them in half like matchsticks. All in all, you are a weak lot.
 Speaking of this woman, leave her alone. I'm asking nicely for now.
 Thanks.
 Mice don't care about these matters.
 How do I kill the plague? Tell me, if you know so much of the earth.
 How does one kill the self in oneself? Answer me this little question, human.\nYou still haven't found any answers to his riddle, other than mundane suicide. Carry on with that. We will help.
 Who is "we"?
 So dumb… How can one be so dumb? So dumb, worthless, and narrow-minded? I hope you don't have any other questions.
 No questions left.
 We're stronger than you think.
 I've got some, but I don't care for your answers.
 I feel that all your words are lies. Or truths twisted beyond repair.
 Respectful One
 Herald Odongh
 Watchdog
 Guard
 …And something with a will and an agenda can be bargained with. Like Mistress Sand Plague. That was your silly hope, was it?
 Watch your tone!
 Who are you? Tell me!
 Yes… It was…
 That's what makes the plague so terrible, you fool! \nYou can't reason with it. There's no method behind it, no mind. No negotiation. There's only death—and if it has a voice, it's yours. Your own voice!
 Imagine your child told you a boogeyman knocks on her window at night. I'd rather check, just in case, than regret it for life.
 Worm
 Notkin
 Aide
 Orderly
 Khetey
 Khatangher
 Kin
 Kid
 Kid
 Burakh's Tagloor
 Audience
 Khatangher
 Big Vlad's Reflection
 Maria Kaina
 Rusty Scalpel
 Either a weapon that can take someone's life, or an essential tool for a surgeon. Shame it's so shoddy.
 A tool for a surgeon. A tool for a menkhu. A tool for a bandit. A tool for a ripper. A tool for me.\n\nThis tool would easily damage an internal organ during an autopsy.
 Bloody Lockpick
 It clearly got inside Piecework's gut unnaturally. I doubt anyone would want to trade for this thing; but I can use it.
 Piecework might have deserved it, but doctors are like soldiers: we don't get to choose who we save… Do we?
 Var the Scar-Faced buys and sells human organs.
 Var's Place
 "Yas" Tincture (+)
 Boosts immunity. Reveals disease symptoms when given to an infected person. Particularly potent.
 
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Layers is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Layers is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 Boosts immunity. Reveals disease symptoms when given to an infected person. Particularly potent.
 "Medrel" Tincture (+)
 "Zürkh" Tincture (+)
 Boosts immunity. Reveals disease symptoms when given to an infected person. Particularly potent.
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Layers is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 White, yellow, red, blue, green…
 What are you kids doing?
 Don't forget orange. That one's nice too.
 Train-summoning.
 What?
 Is it working?
 I doubt you'll make it come in sooner.
 Why do you ask, Uncle Hunchback? And you're so huge... like a giant!
 Can I help?
 I sure am. Eat healthy, and you'll be just as big.
 I'm not a hunchback, I'm just tired.
 There's too few of us. Not enough power.
 Is it like tug-of-war?
 Do you all call at once, or take turns?
 Actually… You are really big. Maybe you <i>can</i> help. Do you know how to train-summon?
 Depends on the train.
 I used to, but it's been a while…
 Look. First you have to wish really, really hard for it to come. Can you do that?
 Definitely.
 Well… I can try.
 Nah, maybe you should go on without me.
 Next, you have to give it a name. It needs to be an adjective. So that it'll be adjacent. Got it?
 "Inevitable."
 "Black."
 "Abrupt."
 "Iron."
 …No, I can't. I'm not good with words.
 Last, find the dead end of a railroad—the southernmost one that goes into the steppe and curves a bit. Stand there and think real hard about how it needs to come soon, and call it by the name held in your mind.\nWill you?
 Perhaps I'll try. Later.
 Fine, if I don't have to say it out loud. At least I won't look stupid.
 Nah, guys, this is too much. See you around.
 Two weeks late already. And I'm waiting for a wonderful parcel…
 Yeah. Food would be a nice delivery, too.
 Candy?
 Two weeks? Huh. That's never happened before.
 Nope. Stamps. And my daddy's peaked cap from the war.
 Well… Sounds cool.
 A whole parcel full of stamps? You're very lucky.
 Racing train. Fast-faster-fastest train. Speedy. Lightning-quick. Uh… Immediate. Ugh… I guess I'm choosing wrong names.
 For the train? Try swearing.
 Those names seem fine.
 What about Hurricane?
 The dog killer is the doghead who saw me at dawn. He will testify to my alibi. We'll meet by the Town Hall.
 
 If I'm desperate, I can find all I need in someone's house. The rest is about picking the lock and shutting up my conscience.
 Siskin
 Swift
 Tot
 Finch
 Teensy
 Chickadee
 Herb Bride
 Ouzel
 Crow
 Goose
 Pochard
 Odongh
 Odongh
 Kayura
 Starling
 Oriole
 Dove
 Tot
 Teensy
 Chickadee
 Siskin
 Pochard
 Goose
 Starling
 Dove
 Kayura
 Crow
 Craftsman
 Corpsman
 Militia
 Infected Person
 Katerina Saburova
 Did you find Isidor's killer yet?
 Not yet.
 Why are you asking?
 You realize the same people who killed him also caused the plague? He stood in their way once and stopped them. This time, they succeeded.
 What?
 Caused the plague?
 Where's your proof?
 Oh, use your head! Isidor was killed—our only doctor. First murder in town for years! And what happens the very next day? An outbreak. You know, if a fire starts from four corners at once, smart folks call it arson.
 This can't be…
 Who would do such a thing? Why?
 Someone wants to eradicate the local population. Maybe even wipe the whole Town off the map. They don't even care if it takes them to their own grave—they can't live like this, so life is meaningless. \nNow… who has reason to hate the existing order of society? Use your head!
 You're talking about the Kin?
 This is a steppe disease, brought by the steppe people. That's where we should be looking. This plague, it didn't start out of nowhere. It was engineered, <i>directed</i> by someone. Ask anyone. It's not natural!
 You're just making shit up!
 You're lying.
 Perhaps… Perhaps you're right.
 I need to think about it.
 Why should I like you? I like my new… friend, now. My talking friend.
 Why doesn't your friend like me, Murky?
 It's good that you're not alone now.
 …She says it's because you're a doctor. She doesn't like that.
 Strange. Usually, that's the only thing people like about me.
 Sigh… I should've been an ice cream salesman.
 Did you bring me anything yummy?
 Hey, kiddo… Are you, by any chance, sick? Lemme take a look…
 No, I don't have anything for you.
 Well… I'm not scared of this plague at all.
 Everyone's dying from it, Murky.
 Then why do you go away for so long?
 I'm a doctor. I'm saving people from the sand plague.
 Not everyone dies from it. Only people who are scared, and I'm not scared at all.
 Who told you that?
 My new friend.
 Do you mean Clara? Is she your new friend?
 No, it's not Clara at all. It's my special friend. She's always with me.
 Okay, I see. I had imaginary friends, too.
 I don't think your friend knows much about medicine.
 Yeah, sure.
 You should be.
 You don't know anything. Some doctor you are.
 I know that it's deadly, Murky. Nobody's recovered from it.
 So you know someone who got sick and didn't die?
 That's very brave of you!
 My friend wants to know: Why do you keep asking everyone about her? Do you want to make friends with her, too?
 I'm not asking around.
 Not really.
 My friend wants you to know you shouldn't touch those who live in the ground! And don't hurt the earth, either. If you cut the earth, or cure it, nothing will grow there anymore.\nSee? My friend is good.
 That's not true about the earth.
 I told you everything I needed to. There's an awesome worm living underground, too. It has two belly spots—blue ones—and tiny little shoes. And hooves.
 A lot of interesting creatures live underground.
 Friends? I'm in.
 Were you listening by the window?
 Yeah. Dead people live there, too.
 Shoes or hooves. It can have one, not both. Make up your mind…
 She's almost… almost here. She just won't come out for some reason. I need to go… call her, I guess.
 What are you doing here?
 I just wanted… I wanted to show you that she's not really evil at all. I wanted to take her by the hand and bring her to you. She can't just get close to you like that if she's not with me. But if she's with me, she can.
 Why can't she get close to me?
 I'll find your friend myself, and I'll decide if you should even be friends with someone like that. Go home.
 You should go hide behind those rocks and wait. Just keep looking at me. I'll wait for her, sort of like a lure. She'll come to the fire when she thinks I'm alone. Then you'll see I'm not making her up.
 Very well, let's see. But I won't wait long. If nobody comes out in ten minutes, we're going home.
 
 
 Misfortune has found its way into the Rod. Or has it always lived there? \n\nI'm no fan of the Saburovs, but if I decide to pay them a visit, I should start with Katerina. Her room is at the back of the mansion.
 Finally, someone! So I was right to wait here… Maybe you, at least, know where she was buried?
 Who?
 You and I might have a friend in common, actually… Does yours have burning eyes and wear a long-nosed mask?
 No… Do you have a friend like that?
 I was just joking.
 Not yet.
 Then she's no friend of mine.
 Is this Murky's friend? There's another little girl hiding inside you, isn't there?
 No. Not a girl, not one, not inside.
 Then what is it?
 I'm picking a family for myself. I think I'm going to be together with my friend. We'll be sisters… or maybe she can even be my mommy. \nAnd I don't have any reason to like you. You're never even home.
 Is that why you brought me here? You made it all up, didn't you?
 I'll try to be home more often. Go home, little one. I don't like that new friend of yours.
 I suppose I don't even have a home. Can you really call that place a home?
 Why?
 She's dangerous. I think I know what she really is.
 Call it a hunch.
 You should just listen to me, like you would to your father. Understood?
 You will go home right this minute.
 When are you coming home?
 Soon.
 I don't know.
 That's up to your friend—hopefully, former friend.
 A lure? That's right! You know she's not your friend!
 You don't know that!
 I'll take a look and tell you later.
 There's nothing to <i>know</i> here. Just trust me.
 What do you want, Burakh? Why are you here? Go do your job, tinkerer! Have you already avenged your father? Come into your inheritance? Saved everyone on the list? Visited the Kin? Have you made a cure?
 So you're Murky's friend?
 Are you dense? You idiot… I'm keeping Murky from the plague. Do you understand? I'm doing it because you can't even watch over one child!
 I'm the one keeping her from the plague. And I have my doubts about you.
 I thought you were a grown man, Burakh. Did you honestly come to believe the disease has a mind, a goal, some agenda? That it walks on clay legs and talks to Murky? That it'll come here to tell you something?
 That's about it.
 How do you know all this?
 That's what I thought: If the plague has a form, it must resemble you.
 I need to check on something… in order to protect that girl over there.
 What do you mean I can't? I can.
 I think the plague has been talking to her for the last few days.
 
 
 Reflections writhe in the Rod's corners—more than in other houses.
 
 
 The townsfolk firmly believe the Saburovs are harboring a plague carrier in their house.
 
 
 Mob justice doesn't solve anything. But who is this orphan carrier girl they're after? I have a bad feeling.
 
 
 I assuaged the crowd, but the cause of their anger still haunts me. Is it true that not all victims of the sand pest die?
 
 
 An orphan girl named Murky knocked on my door. I feel like it's not the last I'm seeing of her. \n\nI think she doesn't like me. What do I do with her…
 
 
 
 
 
 Some friend of Murky's dislikes me.
 
 
 Rumor has it, the outbreak didn't happen by chance. Someone <i>made</i> it happen. A person. Is it possible?
 
 
 
 
 
 Katerina Saburova is sick. And it seems like the governor can also hear the voices in her head. The power of love? Or something shadier?
 
 
 The spirit tormenting Katerina is real, because Living Earth is real. It bears things like this Rat Prophet… and Sand Plague itself.
 
 
 Murky's friend will wait for me after dark by the Crow Stone. I don't like this one bit.
 Some friend of Murky's wanted to meet me at night in the steppe. No, I don't have time for kids' games right now.
 
 
 
 
 
 So Murky's friend is the disease? What the hell? Who speaks in its voice? Who is making fun of me? And if it is alive, what does it want?\n\nTo hell with it. Where's Murky?
 
 So Murky's friend is the disease? What the hell? Who speaks in its voice? Who is making fun of me? And if it is alive, what does it want?\n\nAnd could Murky…
 
 
 No one knows where Murky is buried.
 Was she… buried?
 Murky.
 …She was buried? By whom?
 They put her six feet under, but no one knows where. Capella can't see anything… We thought that if she can't see it, then maybe Murky is still alive somewhere. You don't know, either?
 I don't.
 …She loved you, you know. Murky, I mean. She was overjoyed to find you. All she wanted in the world was to bring her parents back, little weirdo. She believed it might somehow happen—through you.
 I can't bring the dead back.
 …I see.
 When did you last see her?
 So there is still hope?
 Will you protect all of us? The people on your father's list. I think they're the most vulnerable…\nEspecially Murky. I'm worried about her.
 I'm doing my best to look after you all.
 What about Murky?
 How do you know?
 I am my mother's daughter. I know things… I feel currents, sometimes.\nDo you think I can become a real Mistress? Will the butterfly emerge from the cocoon? One of these days, maybe?
 Maybe. I'm not an expert.
 Of course.
 Murky gets… hunches. She's almost a feral child, improperly raised. \nBut she senses things, knows everything from somewhere. Perhaps the earth tells her. Perhaps that's her gift… Understanding its words.
 She knows everything? Like what?
 Tell me more about Murky.
 Seems every other kid here has some gift.
 Earth is soil. Nothing more.
 Do you know why she followed you? How she knows you're Isidor's son?
 No. How?
 Yeah, why <i>did</i> she follow me? I wondered.
 Five years ago, your father, Isidor Burakh, made a grim decision. The outbreak was impeded, but many died.
 …And Murky's family lived in the Crude Sprawl. Didn't they?
 Do you now understand?
 She must hate me.
 I know.
 No. But she feels you are connected.\nHer heart is kind. She doesn't blame you for your father's deeds. And she doesn't remember her parents, because she was very small when it happened. But their absence pains her.
 Connected… Aren't we?
 She's a sweet girl.
 …I do.
 They say the Saburovs nurture the plague. That they harbor a carrier. A girl.
 What carrier?
 They also say you shouldn't waste breath on idle chatter.
 Hell if I know… That's why we're here, to get him to give her up, but he won't. Keeps lying, saying there's no carrier, trying to talk us down. Soon he's gonna cause people to hunt down women in the street, like on that first day.
 Why would they do that?
 And what will you do with her if he does give her up?
 Are you dense, pal? The plague plays right into Saburov's hands. The Kains and Olgimskys have always resented him, but now he wields power. \nHe's pulling out all the stops. <i>Promoting order,</i> he says. Some order!
 Nonsense. He's not like that.
 Who knows, maybe you're right.
 Only one thing to do. Put her back where she came from. Into the earth.
 If they do find a carrier, Saburov won't need your help to deal with them.
 Eager to kill, aren't you?
 Well, healer, will you tell us about the carrier? Is she in there? With him?
 Perhaps. I haven't seen.
 Listen to me, idiots. There is no carrier! It's all nonsense and idle talk.
 Listen carefully, and tell everyone. Even if there is a carrier, that carrier is our salvation.
 What does that mean?
 We'll make a cure from that person's blood. A vaccine. We need the carrier alive for that.
 Nothing for you to question me about. Just do what I tell you and you'll live.
 Is this true, healer?
 I always tell the truth.
 No. I'm kidding.
 Listen to me: no mob justice! Not one girl gets hurt. Do you understand me?
 They also say she's not alone. Not everyone dies from this sickness! Do you get what that means?
 What?
 I do. But we need to make sure, and that's not your job.
 According to my data, everyone dies. No one's survived.
 If there are people who get sick but don't die, the plague must come from them!
 "If."
 That's none of your concern. Go on home now.
 What do you know about connections? That's not how any of this works, you fool!
 She's shown her true colors, the false Mistress. If our beloved white swan Victoria were here, she'd be out on the street, shielding people from trouble.\nAnd Nina… if she were around, none of this would be happening. That's the sort of power <i>she</i> had.\nBut this one just locks herself up at home… A useless Mistress.
 Who are you talking about, ma'am?
 Your Victoria could do nothing about a plague like this.
 I remember Nina. After her, a plague feels like little more than a funhouse.
 You say Victoria… couldn't? You're just faithless! She would! She used to shelter the Town under her bright wings! She used to be our white mother! She would let no trouble in.\nWhat do you even know? Where did you even come from?
 You speak of Mistresses as if they work miracles. They're just women.
 That Saburov woman, Katerina. She's never had power. Utterly barren. We used to pity her, but now she's worse than barren—she sows poison.
 Nonsense. What poison?
 Sorry. I feel sorry for us all.
 So she was a woman of character. So what? They're all like that. Why ask more of her? And what power she had! She radiated heat, like a blazing forest fire. This one doesn't even give off light.
 "This one"?
 A fine excuse. So you like power, then?
 You know nothing, you dolt. If you don't know the power of the Mistresses, then shut your mouth and show some respect.\nHave some sense. Some give off heat, some give off light, some give off poison. We sense that she gives off poison.
 I suppose I should be going.
 No. I don't understand.
 If a person comes to think that you wounded their heart with deceit, does that mean that you truly are guilty of it? Moreso in regards to their feelings, their hopes, and their fears?
 Yes. You betrayed that person's expectations.
 No. Not unless you did intend to deceive them.
 First, we must find the truth. Then the falsehood. Then learn to pick them apart. Only after that can we answer such a question.
 What does this have to do with Alexander Saburov? Are you not his reflection?
 What indeed. I just asked you a question.
 Then: Yes, I suppose.
 Then: No.
 Then: This is a trick question, I shall not answer.
 Then: I forgot what the question was. Probably means it was a threatening sort of question.
 Our town's always had three ruling houses: Kain, Olgimsky, Saburov! Each one would reign o'er their own domain. The Kains were our head; the Olgimskys our belly. But pray, Burakh, tell me what the Saburovs held.
 They were the bones.
 They were the hands.
 They were the nerves.
 The Kains were weavers of laws and of dreams; the Olgimskys were masters of money and men. To Saburov remained an executive power: Their task was to keep the streets in order, in a town where there was almost no crime.
 Wasn't there?
 I guess the genocide that the Olgimskys were perpetrating against the Kin doesn't count as "crime."
 The Kains are proud to call themselves criminals, though. I always remembered that.
 'Tis funny, you see. When the Houses agreed to manage the Town, Saburov was in name the triumvirate's head.\nI know not what that meant, nor what it entailed.
 Veto power, maybe?
 It entails exactly what is happening now. They could seize control in face of a mortal crisis.
 I won't ask you what it meant, then.
 Saburov still believes that his mission is clear: Keep order! He may not look the part, but he is not a fool. He knows duty entails the pursuit of order through fear, and that violent means stain the soul of a duty-bound man.
 Stain the hands, too.
 Thank you, Reflection. I will keep this in mind.
 Ah, yes. The favorite excuse of vicious tyrants everywhere.
 When denied respect, is a man not wounded, Burakh? Not even for evil he does, but for failing to do much at all. Even more when you had not a chance to do any deed of note. There are only so many of those going 'round.
 Can't say. People seem to respect <i>me.</i>
 Nonsense. The world is full of opportunities for greatness.
 Perhaps it is now. But not in ordinary times.
 To live a year of your life without doing something contemptible is already an outstanding feat. One I've never seemed to quite accomplish…
 What I'm doing now will be enough for the rest of my life.
 I speak not of you, Burakh, I speak of my master!\nHis pride, his soul, has been wounded by lack of respect. He needs his authority, now more than ever. The Kains, the Olgimskys, never trusted our House. Perhaps this distrust never turned to contempt. But distrust it was, dear sir.
 What are you getting at, Reflection?
 Indeed, I see where Saburov's pain comes from.
 Respect is a crutch for those without better things to care about.
 Nothing. I've said my peace. You're a healer; one thinks you might care to learn more about pain.
 I am concerned with a different kind of pain.
 You think correctly.
 The wisest women in our town would take the title "Mistress."\nA word that calls to mind the tales of ancient sorcery. Do you believe in such a thing?
 Mistresses were two extraordinary women in the Town's ruling families. There was something undeniably uncanny about them.
 It's not a matter of belief. They're not goddesses.
 Who do you think the Mistresses are, then?
 Steppe-son, you bear the marks of nature's flow upon your skin; but mind how thin the twyre runs in your veins. You are more stone than Earth.\nLike ships must catch the wind in sails, our Town relies on Nature's flow.
 Nature is everywhere. Everything lives by her flows.
 Such "flows" are simple enough. Heat is their nature.
 None know how many winding paths there are; none know what forces run their course. There are no words for what they hold; to see them calls for gifted senses, gifted minds. And should one hear the call of such a gift: What feats, what brave new world, they'd find with it! Like being the very first to hoist a sail.
 Such gifts are not yet the domain of mankind.
 We lost that gift when we learned to make tools.
 Victoria Olgimskaya and Nina Kaina: One five-foot-six, one six-foot-one; mortals. But seen as giants! For they could feel the Powers move across the firmament…
 Women can sense these things.
 And?
 Some merely know the flows. Some feel them, now and then. A mistress tastes those waves, might drink of them. And when the stars align, might ride them. The people felt such women knew the workings of the world itself…
 And that's it?
 How is that not enough? The mistresses kept their hands quite clean of rough and tawdry magics. Victoria knew not a spell that brought the dead to life. But Nina did inspire fear. Along her steps, doors shut and children hid! But those two women gave the Town its life. None know the hows or whys of such a power.
 I've heard that Victoria did raise the dead. But that's probably just a rumor.
 Clearly they didn't bolt those doors tightly enough.
 Yes, I knew a man like that. Nobody knew how, but his presence would severely change the… pressure. Every time.
 Two Mistresses there were, and all felt that to be correct. For one was Night and one was Day; one was Heat and one was Cold; one was Storm, and one was Calm. Contrast reigned.\nNina held court over schism and unease; Victoria's domain was peace and nourishment.
 The Bright and the Fearsome, as they were called.
 The Dark and the Warm. Right, I recall.
 Taste and Laughter.
 The Kains had Nina; the Olgimskys had Victoria. When Saburov returned with his young bride, my Katerina, there was no place for her in such a scheme.\nBut her hairs would raise, and her skin would sense it. And once Nina did perish, Katerina took her place and seized a name for herself…
 …Nina, the Wicked.
 …Nina, the Wild.
 …Nina, the Nocturnal.
 Nina did only drive men to fear. But Katerina, naive as she was, mistook the nuance of Nina's role for a romantic darkness. And that in turn would drive her down the road to frightful things.
 And nobody really noticed.
 Luckily, she never became a second Nina.
 And is that such a blessing, sir? Nina did not just take children from their mothers.\nShe tinged our lives with color. Recall how in her days to walk the streets was an adventure.
 Yes, I remember those days.
 Perhaps our town would have been like that without her. It's not like anyone can check.
 Victoria died, and Katerina replaced both Mistresses. Two roles to play; she grew into neither.\nBut patient folk would wait for her to find her gift. And some may still await her day.
 True, it is easier to be fearsome than kind.
 She should have stayed out of those games.
 She took our… strange customs too seriously.
 Wild Nina begat Maria, the talented. Warm Victoria begat Capella, the gifted.\nMy Mistress has no one… She'd take any child, to raise as her kin, gift or no gift.
 Is she afraid?
 Is she in pain?
 Is she ashamed?
 She sits in darkness, weaving blackest yarn from heaviest thoughts.\nShe'd rather knit baby socks…\nInstead, she drapes black folds around her throat and chokes.
 There, there… No need to cry.
 Don't whine, Reflection.
 At night we hear her talk to herself, mad: I failed to give life to the Town, talentless! I failed to nourish town or child, giftless! I failed to guard against plague, useless! I am barren!
 I could prescribe something for her nerves.
 A grown woman, still playing at being a sorceress!
 She'll manage. Probably. There's definitely still time for her to have a child.
 But have you heard? Such wondrous news! We wait, in awe, for our new daughter, true and talented!\nAnd such a talent, sir! A blessed gift! And now we are not two but three; and one will much more mighty than two be.
 I'm happy for your mistress, Reflection.
 So where is this girl?
 She's pregnant?
 The daughter's adopted, and near grown up. It is for the best; we wait too long, and now, and orphan child will have a home at last.
 Can I see her?
 Yes, it's for the best.
 She walks the streets, and does her chores… Bound to this plague, somehow. She has the gift, so she must stay to stop the plague. Salvation can and must come from the House of Saburov.
 Your mistress has gone mad, Reflection.
 I've met that girl. She does indeed carry a long list of chores…
 What is this gift? Is that even important right now?
 Wait! Strike, if you will, but hear me. I came to entrust the lives of my new parents to you.
 I wonder what you did to your old ones.
 There was someone gullible enough to adopt you?
 "Strike, if you will, but hear"? Picked up some Latin from Dankovsky?
 Actually, it's Greek. Want me to give you the context?
 No need. I know it.
 You can distinguish Greek from Latin? I'm impressed.
 What? Why would you say that? I never even knew them. I've been an orphan for as long as I can remember.
 I didn't know.
 Right, that's what I figured.
 There was.
 Are they sick?
 I pity them.
 There's trouble looming over both of them. Something with their house. It's a house of troubles. My adopted mother is especially in danger. Can you help us? Can you watch over them? Please.
 If no one's dearer to you, watch over them yourself.
 Wait a second. Don't I ruin everything I touch? Isn't that what you told me?
 Forgive me. Please forgive me. Please.
 Why don't you help them yourself? Aren't you supposed to be the greatest healer in the world?
 I forgive you. But I want answers.
 I… I did take care of them. But I can't any longer. I need to disappear for a while. Maybe even forever.\nDon't ask… Please. You'll understand soon enough. But tell me you'll do it, Burakh! I know you have a warm heart!
 Fine. Who are they?
 Tell them to come to me.
 A warm heart and a cool head. I can tell that something's off. I'm saying no.
 The Saburovs. They're my new mother and father.
 You're a good fit for each other.
 The Saburovs… A house of troubles. I see.
 They can't. They won't. They don't know.
 They're bedridden?
 Don't know about what?
 Will you do it? They'll never ask anyone themselves! Mother thinks the whole Town hates her for failing to protect them from the plague! \nAnd father… He takes all evil on himself, so that no one else will be soiled. But mother has the worst of it. She needs a doctor…
 I'll do it. Be on your way now. Let Mother Boddho caress your step.
 I'll pay her a visit, but I can't promise I'll save her.
 No. Watch over those bloodsuckers yourself.
 So... have you seen my parents? How are they doing?
 Not yet.
 They care for one another. But what about you? Why aren't you taking care of them?
 Saburov is in trouble. People are unhappy with him—because of you.
 What...? People harass them? Because of me? Oh, but what do they want... why can't they just leave me alone!
 Is it true that you're immune to the plague?
 They think you're a carrier. Is it true?
 Oh my God, sweet God in heavens, obviously, seriously, definitely, clearly I'm not!
 Phew. You got me there for a moment.
 People believe that there is an urchin girl that the disease doesn't take for some reason. Do you know of many other suspects?
 Uh, a ton! There are lots of urchin girls around, especially these days.\nBut no matter how many there are, those rumors are utter drivel! Sand pest kills everyone it touches. There's no salvation... unless I help.
 Really?
 Many people think you're a saint. But there's something uncanny about you.
 Fools! Utter fools! They all think I'm connected to the plague because... because... I don't know why! Guess it's because I'm always first wherever calamity strikes. But that's because I rush to help...
 You're scaring me, Clara. And not just me.
 Help—by putting them out of their misery, huh?
 I can't. I can't go there. I don't want to make them look suspicious...
 Why would you make them look suspicious?
 You already have.
 Forget it.
 You're connected to this plague. Aren't you, Clara?
 I suspect you're patient zero, as the Bachelor would have put it.
 Then go, please! Before it's too late!
 I know!
 They're wealthy. They live in a sturdy house. Others need my help more.
 I'm a good person, Burakh. You can tell lies from truth, don't you? Then you know I'm not lying! I'm a good person.\nAnd if anyone tells you I'm a shapeshifter... those are just rumors. Shapeshifters don't exist!
 Fine. I believe you.
 No. I don't trust you.
 All kinds of things exist...
 The Rod
 Why did Clara tell me that Katerina requires help? She seems fine. Her husband, however…
 An angry mob pesters Alexander Saburov. They're looking for the plague carrier.
 Katerina's Reflection
 Alexander's Reflection
 Detractor
 Detractor
 Clara
 Murky
 My friend told me to tell you this: Why are you asking around about her? Do you want to make friends with her?
 I'm not asking around about her.
 Not really.
 Friends? Sure.
 My friend told me to tell you: You can't touch the ones who live in the earth! Also, you can't hurt the earth. If you cut it open or cure it, or something like that, things won't grow there anymore.\nSee? My friend's good.
 Things will grow there, actually.
 That fellow in the rat costume, is he a friend of yours?
 Were you eavesdropping by the window?
 Well, I just told you everything in general. Also, there's a wonderful worm living in the earth. It has two blue spots on its belly and tiny boots on its tiny feet with tiny hooves.
 Plenty of wonderful critters live in the earth.
 Yeah. You know what else lives in the earth? Corpses.
 Hooves <i>and</i> boots? Make up your mind.
 A rat costume? Ooh, can I have a rat costume too?
 Forget it. I'm just seeing things.
 It won't look good on you.
 Rat Prophet
 Clara
 I had a fight with Sticky, all because of your father again! I'm so worried now… What if we never make up?
 "Again"? What do you mean, "again"?
 Because! Everything is bad because of your dad. He always made everyone sad.
 Really? Everyone?
 What did you fight about?
 Don't worry about it. I bet it's something silly.
 I know why you feel this way, Murky…
 I do.
 But he really didn't kill your parents. The disease did.
 He didn't want to do it, Murky.
 Yes, he did.
 Why do you think so?
 Sticky says that your father is good, that he was smart and kind to people. But I know that's not true.
 Why isn't it?
 No, he's good. He was. It's true.
 If it weren't for him, we would be living like we used to, and nothing would be bad.
 How do you know that?
 Is your friend telling you things again?
 I know because I feel that way.
 Well… I guess there's no convincing you otherwise.
 My friend would never lie, you know. She talks about it, too.
 Are you sure?
 I guess she overrules me and Sticky, then.
 What did my father even do to you?
 Your dad… He killed my parents.
 That's new. Where did you hear that?
 That's what I heard. He locked them up so they couldn't go outside, so they got sick and died. I was just two years old.
 Someone told you a ridiculous lie!
 Damn… The First Outbreak…
 Murky, he didn't kill them. They died from the plague. He had no choice.
 Don't cry, little one. Please don't cry.
 I hope I can make up with Sticky… I don't hate having a brother at all. He grumbles a lot, but he's really nice. He makes food for me. Yesterday, he brought me sugar! He put it over a candle and made a piece of candy…
 You'll make up. I'm sure of it.
 Where did that rascal find it?
 Of course you don't hate having a brother…
 Ah, Burakh. As you can see, we're making progress with your case. There's plenty of evidence against him.
 What evidence?
 Well?
 Put him in prison. Let him stay there. It's safer that way.
 It's not him. I'm sure of it. You can release him now.
 That, Burakh, is ultimately not your decision. I only wanted your opinion. I will do with him as I see fit.
 Very well.
 Solid evidence. Would you like to speak with him yourself?
 What evidence?
 …That's not what I expected.
 So what are you going to do with him?
 In times like these, we can't get bogged down with investigations and hearings. Throw him in prison. Let him stay there… until things calm down.
 Wait. I want to speak with him first.
 Will they? I wouldn't want to find myself in prison at a time like this.
 I'll find the murderer myself, Governor. I trust myself more.
 Then my opinion is this: Prison's no place for an innocent man.
 Ah, yes. Burakh. Just when I needed you… Although, I actually need you for another matter. I'll figure out what to do with this wretch myself.\nI suspect foul play. Since you're here, you may speak with him, if you like.
 What other matter?
 I wish to talk to you alone. Make this troglodyte's acquaintance if you like, or simply wait. We can start as soon as I send off the convoy.
 Wait. I'll speak with him.
 No, don't do anything to him without my input. I have a few questions to ask him first.
 Go ahead and send them off. I'll pay him a visit in prison later.
 I would, thanks.
 He was with Isidor the night of the murder. He followed your father through the steppe at night. They were seen together. His story doesn't add up.\nIs that enough? I'm not an investigator, I'm the head of my house! And in these strange, strange times, the governor of this mad circus.
 So, who is the investigator?
 So, as the head, what will you do with him?
 You work fast. Another one, already? Just as guilty as the first?
 Who knows. Maybe you can find out?
 Probably not. But I would like to speak with him.
 What did you want to talk about?
 Something's still not right in The Rod. I should check on Alexander.
 Our theatre has seen better days. The repertory is getting stale. Same play, over and over again. It's beginning to get on my nerves.
 Friend
 
 
 The bull will be sacrificed at the Ragi Barrow in the evening. I think six is the right time.
 ???
 Clock Puncher
 That's all right. It'll be more fun soon.
 
 
 Saburov seized Father's murderer!
 
 
 The steppe man did not kill Father. He hasn't done anything wrong at all.
 The steppe man informed the people who did not need to know of Father's actions. But he's no killer.
 
 
 Saburov… seized Father's murderer again? Sounds dubious.
 
 
 That man is not a murderer. Curiously, his evidence suggests Simon Kain knew that Father was doomed beforehand.
 
 
 Who murdered Father? I still have no idea. There's only one thing I can tell for certain: Saburov knows even less.\n\nI can't rely on him in my search.
 
 
 Among other things, Father left me a list. Apart from seven kids, there was an eighth name there. "Udurgh." Who or what is it?
 Apart from the seven kids, there was an eighth on the list: "Udurgh." An udurgh, perhaps? Who or what is it? I suspect I will one day have to find out.
 
 Apart from the seven kids, there was an eighth on the list: "Udurgh." An udurgh, perhaps? Who or what is it? \n\nI suspect I will one day have to find out.
 
 
 The patients on my list are under threat.
 
 
 
 
 
 Notkin is infected.\n\n…Shouldn't he have been "in danger" first? It's breaking its own rules!
 
 
 The sand pest threatens the kids, but it's not them it wants. It wants the Eighth, the udurgh. And I can't protect it if I don't figure out what it is!
 
 
 Aspity might know who or what an udurgh is. She's well-versed in the steppe lore.
 Aspity doesn't know for certain what "udurgh" means. But perhaps I can extract more out of her?
 
 
 Rubin… He spent a lot of time with Father. Perhaps he's heard of this "udurgh"?
 
 
 Udurgh is a living thing.
 
 
 Rubin doesn't know jackshit. But he gave me an idea: Olgimsky's son studies steppe lore. Perhaps I could ask him?
 
 
 This "udurgh" is elusive. Many know the word, but few grasp the full meaning. \n\nForeman Oyun could explain it to me… but he's locked up with the rest of the Termitary.
 
 
 The udurgh's ear is in an abandoned steppe village—whatever that means. It's quiet for now. I need to wait.
 Infected Blood
 Can be used like any other infected organ.
 What d'ya want, man?
 Do you know what Stakh Rubin's been up to? He's kept me in the dark.
 What? Are you busy with something? I can't tell.
 Then that's the way he wants it, isn't it? Why would I give you a lantern?
 Have you seen him?
 Of course I am. I'm ruminatin'. What's that, if not work?
 I'm working too, then. Have you seen Rubin?
 Ha. I'd pay good coin to never see him, but I can't help but bump into the man… Neighbors share labors, as the sayin' goes.
 Did he join your gang? That's… unexpected.
 Screw your head back on, will you? You're shortin' out. We'd recruit a pig and all her piglets before we ever considered Rubin.\nHe just needed a hideout. And who'd help the poor sod but me? We're friends, after all.
 And where would that hideout be?
 Won't tell you. I promised to not sell him out, so I won't. Go look for it yourself. I've said enough.
 Yes. You have said enough. Thanks.
 If you're bumping into each other, he must be close.
 Fair enough. I'll find him on my own.
 Did he run into trouble?
 I'd like to know that, too. But he's a man with a code, like you. Doesn't trust me. Probably pains him to stoop to my level.\nDoesn't bother me. I'm not proud.
 You mentioned you weren't seeing each other often, right?
 You're neighbors now? So he hides out at the Warehouses?
 
 
 Stakh Rubin is doing something shady at night. Where could he be?\n\nOh, Stakh… Still, he's a friend. I have a bad feeling. Better hurry.
 
 
 So Rubin's not at home either. Not unexpected.\n\nGuess I'll have to ask the sly one, supposedly aware of everyone's comings and goings…
 
 
 Rubin operates in the Warehouses. That's all I know. A needle in a haystack… but perhaps there's some sort of trace?
 
 
 
 ???
 I'd like to trade with you, for my conscience's sake. But no one will trade with thieves or murderers. Barter is about trust.
 I'm neither thief nor murderer, pal. You'd do well to remember that.
 How fares your kine, Khatangher?
 Poorly.
 So relieved they brought fresh water from the springs. Otherwise, we'd have to drink from the Gorkhon.
 Have you lost it? You see the Abattoir over there? Guess where all its waste gets dumped.
 One and two and one and two,\nSteppe has gotten into you.\nWho breathes air in the fall,\nDies before he sees it all.
 But I like breathing.
 Hey, big fella… On your way here, did you hear anything? Like a train?
 What train?
 Do you still have a name?
 Same as you, I believe.
 A murderer walks the streets. Human or shabnak, who knows… But our kids are outside, too. Won't stay home no matter what we tell them!
 Why can't you just ground them?
 What does conscience have to do with it?
 Pah! "Trust." You're superstitious. I remember this attitude growing up.
 Barter is a sacred tradition. You understand that it's not about objects at all, don't you?
 Not about objects? Would you like to trade your coat for a match, then?
 I might have accepted that offer. But I won't trade with a man who has a burdened conscience. Why poison my own fate?
 There is no fate. We make our own lives.
 Nothing sacred about it… It's just old.
 Don't worry. You won't.
 A clear conscience is important… but even if I have sinned, it's not contagious. So mind your own soul, pal.
 You're weird. <i>Your</i> fate won't improve my life, only my own trust. Get it? When I trust someone, I get lucky, so good things come my way.
 Fair enough. I guess I didn't think about it.
 Fine. I'll clear my good name soon. Then we can barter.
 Trust is about forgiving your enemies, and seeing the good in them.
 Bayarlaa. How fares your kine?
 Finally! Someone who doesn't treat me like a villain.
 We, the Khatanghe, must help each other out. You are our Kin. \nYou shouldn't get into fights, tangher. You'll always lose, no matter who remains standing.
 How come?
 Think, tangher. If they kill you, then it's very bad, right? But if <i>you</i> kill <i>them,</i> it's still bad. Everyone will hate you. Won't let you in, sell you food, or barter. You'll be hunted. Do you need a wolf's life?
 Damned if you do, damned if you don't…
 I'd rather lose standing.
 But they don't treat each other that way!
 We are the Kin. They dislike us.
 I'm a halfbreed. I only have steppe blood on my father's side.
 Don't get into fights, unente. Clear up your name first. As time passes, people will accept you. Then do as you please.
 Sounds tempting.
 True. We are the Kin.
 I don't identify as one of you.
 Bayarlaa. Let Mother Boddho caress your step.
 Nice poem. You write that yourself?
 Guess a bear like you can breathe some and be fine. But only some.
 A bear, huh? Friends used to call me Cub when we were kids. But back then, it was ironic.
 If only! I'll never be that good.\nWhen'd you last sleep? The circles around your eyes, the wheezing… Just observing facts. Are you an outsider?
 I'm a local. Just been away for a while.
 I just arrived.
 I'm not one to turn down small favors.
 Mom says that while twyre, chickenpox, crowberry, swish, and joy all bloom, you have to sleep every five hours. Or your head will explode!
 You're thinking of a stroke.
 No explosions, but our brains do get less oxygen in the fall around here.
 Your mom is right.
 She seems to be an expert on local herbs.
 Huh? Are you a doctor or something? I hate doctors. Mom says all doctors are slackers and frauds, even Old Burakh.
 Yes. I'm a doctor.
 I'm a surgeon. Ever considered having your tongue removed?
 Gorkhon water will turn you into livestock. Saw it with my own eyes.
 You have no sense of humor, tenegh. Who'd drink from the Gorkhon? Even blood would be better. So, fresh spring water is good news.\nBut I wonder how long it will last…
 What about water bearers? Have they left for more?
 It used to last for quite a while. Did something change?
 Fat Vlad used to manage the water bearers. Now, it's his son.\nThe father is cruel, but he knows his business. The son is kinder, but useless. He'll certainly mess everything up.
 Why?
 What use are kind people? We aren't kind. We deserve no kindness.
 You're not cruel… Just bitter.
 True.
 Why do you think he's useless?
 Vlad the Younger manages the water bearers now, but he's a simpleton. I've even heard rumors he might be digging a well… \nSurely false, of course. Even someone completely incompetent wouldn't do that.
 Indeed. I doubt anyone in this town would be that reckless.
 Just superstition. I also believed it, for a while, but not anymore.
 No, I haven't heard anything.
 Oh, an outsider. So! We send meat and skins to the outside world, and they send back a big ol' train of provisions, mostly stuff we can't make.\nDad says it's like living out at sea, on a faraway island.
 Yeah, I'm a local. I already know all this.
 Does your dad work at the Factory? The skinnery or the cannery?
 Wha—? No, my dad's a postman! If he worked at the Factory, phew… I wouldn't be here at all! 'Cause mom would've had an abortion!
 Hey! Aren't you too young to talk about that kind of stuff?
 
 
 
 It's time to see if Rubin is done with his shady business.
 
 
 
 
 
 The Kin will only leave Rubin alone when he "rots on his own." There's nothing I can do about it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 There was no udurgh in the old village, but I found strange blood there. I wonder what happens if I mix it with a tincture?
 
 
 I vouched for Rubin to an Elder.
 
 
 The mysterious blood produced a vial of liquid. Now I need to test it on someone infected.
 
 
 It was all worth it. I made the serum. The panacea. My concoction cures the plague completely.
 Why? She says it herself when she sees Uncle Bertie.
 Sure, the life of a factory worker isn't exactly blessed…
 The train is already two weeks late. We might very well starve soon. Like, we've almost run out of sweets. Uta bartered away all her buttons for a lump of sugar yesterday! Unbelievable!
 Two weeks? That's a long time, actually…
 Unbelievable, indeed. I'd keep my buttons.
 Beats unemployment.
 And you walk around repeating it? Have some tact.
 What do you mean, "still"? It will remain with me even as I die.
 Father threw his out. He's faceless, now. Makes me kinda sad.
 Why did he do that?
 I bet it does!
 Cheer up. Faces and names are only fiction.
 Guess he did something bad… I wonder what.
 Or something good. That's how it usually goes.
 I don't think knowing would do you any good.
 But I'm curious. I would hate to lose my name.
 …And your face, yes? Cheer up. It'll be fine.
 Really? Do you know for sure? 'Cause he can't tell now.
 Of course. He understood something very important.
 Same here.
 You just… don't stop loving him.
 So what? Fate will get you anywhere.
 Fate! Why do I care if it's fate or not if illness befalls me? Who said each person only has one, single fate?
 I didn't. Perhaps we have several.
 But they do.
 Everything's terrible… It all started with that awful tower. There's nothing we can do, now. Kids do whatever they damn well please. \nCan't say anything to them… I mean that. Try, and the words stick in your throat. They've become complete strangers to us. But what about common blood, I ask you? What about paternal love?
 You're sure there's nothing to be done?
 What does this have to do with the Tower?
 Hard to explain… The Tower crushes us. Try to speak a word against it, and it's as if an invisible blade slices your vocal cords.\nIt did something to our kids. Like they're crossing a river over thin ice, and you can't follow, only call after them.
 They'll return, and the ice will become thicker.
 Because they belong to that damned tower now.
 What is it, anyway?
 Eh, it's natural. When I was a kid, I also preferred to be outside.
 Do you know who built it?
 The Kains, of course, let the fires of hell take them. Who else? If only the Saburovs ruled this town by themselves, it'd be such a nice place…
 Oh… Makes sense now.
 Don't worry about the kids. They're smarter than us.
 How many children do you have?
 Me? Two younger brothers. Twelve and fifteen. Both in the Tower.
 Let them play.
 Living in their own world could be good for them.
 Nothing a few lashes with a belt wouldn't fix.
 
 
 ???
 
 
 
 My respects to you, esegher. You looking for him, too?\nHe has not come yet. Sly.
 Why are you looking for him?
 What's he so afraid of?
 So he hasn't been home for a while?
 This is our third night of waiting.
 Why are you so persistent?
 Elders say he's wronged us grievously. Elders say many Khatanghe will die for his misdeeds.
 What has he done?
 Why?
 A bull knows when olonngo is near. He doesn't want to go in. Pushes back.
 Come on. How did he wrong you?
 Olonngo? Oh, right. "A ford." Your name for the Abattoir.
 Who knows? Who cares? Elders say, and we obey. What is there to think about? Why think without reason? Too soon to think.
 Father was <i>so</i> right to send me away from here.
 Indeed. Thinking is hard.
 Go away. Clearly he knows you've laid your ambush here.
 Yes! It works!
 Stakh Rubin
 Executor
 Well, Burakh, you're nearly dead. Got a few minutes left. I'm here to announce your demise.
 Can't do much on such short notice.
 Are you with that… crowd?
 How do you know my name?
 I know everything. Part of the unfortunate job. I've got your whole journey laid out here.
 And what sort of journey is it going to be?
 Of course I'm not. They were just peaceful townsfolk. Craftsmen, factory workers, good sons and fathers… but me, I'm much more dangerous. I'm the Mask of Fate.
 Peaceful? Yeah right. Why did they try to kill me?
 And what's my fate?
 It's not pretty, Burakh.
 Really? Why?
 My esteemed colleague will explain.
 So what did you want to tell me?
 You've been bashed on the head several times, and the locals' fists are heavy. And one of those four stab wounds looks deep. Significant blood loss, too, and the local climate is unforgiving in terms of strain. \nDo you have any heart conditions?
 None.
 Ha.
 My heart's too soft.
 Your health is a mess. I'm guessing you haven't eaten in several days, and that you didn't sleep last night… Did you? That's what I thought. So your hunger and exhaustion are critical, too. I wonder which of these afflictions will be the death of you first… \nSo what's your plan?
 Any good advice?
 If I'm going to die, so be it.
 Aw, fatalism looks cute on you. Better not to make proclamations like that without gritting your teeth. \nProblem is, your teeth have almost been knocked out, so clenching your jaw is hard. Fatalism's much more fun when you've got options, isn't it?
 Maybe.
 I'm done with you. Piss off.
 Dressing your wounds would be a good idea.
 Where would I get bandages?
 Thanks, beakhead. But the doggy over there helped me already.
 What doggy, Burakh? Are you hallucinating already? There aren't any dogs here.
 I could use more bandages, though, if I knew where to get them.
 A drugstore, Burakh! You've been studying surgery for six years and you're just finding this out now? \nBut it's not just about the wounds. Even when they're dressed, you still need to be aware of your body. It's not always on your side. Pay attention to its needs.
 I'll figure it out. What next?
 Thanks. I'll keep you in mind if I need to learn more about human anatomy.
 Next you die anyway, because the whole town will soon have it out for you. And it's got nothing to do with the three poor souls you've just done in.
 Great. Why do they hate me?
 My colleague over there can explain it better. That's his role. Mine is teaching you how your body works, so you don't die <i>before</i> you make it home.
 Fair enough. Forewarned, forearmed.
 I don't need it. I'm a doctor, remember?
 [a long, but useful conversation about survival in this unfriendly world]
 [a conversation worth having]
 [i don't have time for long talks]
 Wait just a second. A short warning here. You can, of course, rely on telepathy to skip a conversation. But do keep in mind that you will never be able to return to it again. Ever.
 Wow, a talking bird! One more caw please.
 Got it. Now shoo.
 You don't have to mince words. Be my guest, cover your ears, sing la la la—it will all end soon, anyway. Even a conversation skipped will leave… crumbs of meaning in your mind.\nYou'll still be able to limp to the next plot point. But you'll reach the destination with a head just as empty as it is now.
 All right, fine. You've got three minutes. What did you want to tell me?
 [and this is where this conversation ends]
 Persistent, huh? Good. Maybe you'll even survive a day or two this way.
 Got a bite? Birdseed's fine.
 I was on my way to talk to your colleague. Mixed you two up. You're sort of similar.
 Food is sold in shops. Though your reputation might prevent you from a warm welcome. \nBut there's a meat warehouse nearby that was conveniently broken into recently. The perpetrators walked down the railroad tracks. There, ahead and to the right. Think you can catch up to them?
 Not sure. To be honest, I'm dead tired.
 Yes. The railroad track that goes through the Warehouses is just a stone's throw away.
 You can sleep at someone's place… if they like you enough. I doubt there's anyone like that around, though… People have forgotten you.\nYou do have your own house, I suppose. Do you remember where it is?
 Of course.
 Actually, I could use a map.
 Thanks, I know that already.
 Godspeed, Burakh. Though I doubt it'll be easy, God's presence or not.
 Easy isn't my style, anyway.
 Any useful advice, then?
 Be careful. Be stealthy. People are scared out of their minds now, and quick to attack. Trust no one. Speak to my esteemed colleague over there. He wants a word with you.
 All right.
 I already have. You're both useless.
 I'll manage without his wisdom, I'm sure.
 Welcome back home, Warden. You've been away a while. You probably don't even remember the heady scent of twyre in the air… Do you know why you got attacked?
 No clue.
 I'm not a warden to anyone, much less to an irritating bird.
 Rude. Do you think it's smart to get cheeky at me? Don't spit into the wind, as the saying goes.\n"Wardens," Burakh, are your family's role in the local steppe Kin. You <i>are</i> a steppe man, aren't you?
 Half. My father is a steppe man.
 It's an old tradition. No one remembers it anymore.
 And that's your business how?
 Your father does.
 Father is the sort of person who remembers everything.
 Yeah. The locals respect him a lot.
 Indeed. Old Isidor Burakh is the exemplar of a true doctor—and a true human being, if a miserable one. Do you honor your father?
 I do.
 We're done here. I won't discuss my father with you.
 He's the reason I returned. He summoned me… with a letter. Said there was a threat. Do you know anything about it?
 The whole Town is looking for a murderer. A very important and respected man was killed last night. The townsfolk loved him better than some children love their fathers. Don't be too hard on them.
 Should I feel bad for them? Say sorry, maybe?
 What does that have to do with me?
 Who was killed?
 Maybe you should. Your father would. A brilliant doctor. Far better than us.
 I know.
 Oh, we're colleagues, now?
 Eh. I'm more of a manager, really. But I'm in the field. And we've done a lot of business with your father.
 Well, Father and I practice, unlike you. So don't pigeonhole us together.
 Leave my father alone. What do you want with me?
 Whatever. That bit's not important. Time is short. Oh, by the way, Burakh… Time is important. Be careful how you spend it. And be aware that you don't have much left.
 How much?
 I know. A few more minutes. Your colleague already told me.
 You knew the victim—less than you thought, but more than most. Don't worry, you'll learn more soon. But I, personally, can't divulge this sort of information. Investigator's privilege.
 So you're an investigator?
 Aren't we all? Everyone lies, so you can only get to the bottom of things by using your brain. That's what your father used to say. It's an actual quote from him, by the way, because I happen to know him. And we got even better acquainted today. How about you? Did you two argue much? 
 Never.
 Why do you care so much, bird?
 You know him? Unlikely. He hates people who hide their faces.
 Nothing's a threat to him anymore, trust me. Maybe dishonor. But even that's unlikely. You're a man of obligation, after all, aren't you?
 I am.
 Runs in the family. Why?
 No dishonor will come to him for any reason.
 Well… a little more.
 I intend to live to eighty, no less. We're a long-lived family.
 You've got less than two weeks, Burakh. Twelve or so days. Trust me, I'm a… specialist. So use your time well. And hurry home now. Why are you wasting your time here? Your father's waiting.
 I'm a picture of good health. Trust <i>me,</i> I'm the doctor here.
 I should hurry home, that's true. That's why I returned to town, after all.
 I don't like you much, beakhead.
 You've just got <i>that</i> sort of face. Suspicious. Unfamiliar. Menacing…
 My face is perfectly normal, thanks.
 But I'm a local. I'm from here.
 [a conversation about your recent past and likely future]
 [i'd like to know that]
 [i'll figure it out myself]
 Wait just a second. A short warning here. You can, of course, rely on telepathy to skip a conversation. But do keep in mind that you will never be able to return to it again. Ever.
 Wow, a talking bird! One more caw please.
 Got it. Now shoo.
 You don't have to mince words. Be my guest, cover your ears, sing la la la—it will all end soon, anyway. Even a conversation skipped will leave… crumbs of meaning in your mind.\nYou'll still be able to limp to the next plot point. But you'll reach the destination with a head just as empty as it is now.
 All right, fine. You've got three minutes. What did you want to tell me?
 [and this is where this conversation ends]
 
 
 Why did you come, kholboön? There's enough of us here already. We begin soon.\nOr do you want to protect your friend? He's dead already. Can't be changed.
 Perhaps I do want to protect him.
 Can't <i>anything</i> be done about this?
 The heart of the Kin has made up its mind, so this is how it will be. If you kill us, others will come. If not today, tomorrow.\nYou cannot save your friend. He's ubshe. A dead man.
 "The heart"... you choose pretty words. I know a word or two as well. Who is in charge of all this? Whom do I need to talk to for you to leave Stakh alone?
 You pitiless beasts… At times like this, I'm ashamed to be a Khatangher myself.
 No one. There are no ones. Only the Whole. The People. The Kin. The Khatangher. It shares a heartbeat, a sense. It decides nothing. It acts.\nYour friend is a thorn in our heart. If you truly want to help him, pray to Stepmother Suok, kiss Earth. Pray for the thorn to rot on its own. Then there'll be no need to extract it.
 You want me to pray that he dies on his own, sparing you the dirty work? No way in hell.
 I may not protect him from the whole Kin, but I can sure deal with you bunch.
 Khatangher
 Khatangher
 Cub? The heck are you doin' here?
 I was about to ask the same.
 This place is fascinating. A sort of club.
 Just… collecting folklore.
 You heard about Rubin? Know why the Kin wants him dead? He's walkin' around all downcast, doesn't sleep. Says not to ask. Says it's safer like that.\nWhat's he done, I wonder? I wanted to ask Sahba, but maybe you know?
 Rubin is in danger? What makes you think so?
 You're lying. That's not what you wanted to ask. I can tell.
 I don't know. Guess he's overworked.
 She's dead. Go home.
 If I did lie, I wouldn't tell you the truth now anyway, would I? So back off.\nLike your people say: "Who can pierce the nature of things better than a yargachin butcher? Only a yargachin idiot."
 Who told you that Rubin's in trouble?
 "Yargachin" means "butcher." Stop flaunting your ignorance.
 I check up on him. We're neighbors now, after all. It was me who granted him his new den.
 Huh… I see. Well, I'll check up on him too, then.
 Where? Show me.
 Already told you too much. This business is between me and Rubin, not you. He wanted secrecy, he got it. Makin' an exception for Artemy? Nah.
 That's all right. The Warehouses aren't endless. I'll find him.
 All right, all right. Consider the secrecy maintained.
 Bad Grief
 Messenger
 Governor Saburov is calling for you. It's urgent.
 What's the matter?
 Urgent. Always is.
 It appears your father's killer has been found. The interrogation is held at the Rod.
 I'll be there. Go. Warn everyone I'm coming.
 Found again? They've found one before. Me.
 
 Suspect
 I know you, yargachin. May Mother Boddho caress your step. \nYou're my salvation. You know the Lines and can tell lies from truth. Look into my eyes. I did not kill your father.
 Why were you taken?
 Talk to me. Don't hold anything back. What happened that night?
 For a good reason.
 How so?
 A good reason? And yet you didn't kill my father?
 Here is how. I betrayed your father. I am guilty of that. I may even be responsible for his death.\nBut it was from ignorance! Boddho is my witness—I wished him no harm!
 Tell me.
 Wished none, but did some, huh?
 On the eve of their deaths, your father and Simon Kain went out into the steppe. They dug a hole. In secret.\nI witnessed this and told Tycheek, the Termitary overseer. I should have gone to Foreman Oyun, of course… He was a friend to your father.
 So what happened next?
 What makes you think going to Foreman Oyun would have been better?
 And what of it? You told Tycheek. So what?
 What does Simon Kain have to do with this?
 Digging a hole is… well, you understand. You wouldn't hack at your mother's breast, would you?
 I would if it were necessary to cure her.
 What happened then?
 They were friends. Oyun would have gone to your father and resolved the problem face-to-face, in private, to avoid trouble. But Tycheek… he flew into a rage. Remember how he never had much love for your father?
 I don't. What next?
 I do. Go on.
 Do you know the Lines? Perhaps not, but your father did. I don't believe he meant evil, but the elders… they ran after them, into the steppe.\nThat's what I did, yargachin. You may judge me now.
 And that's all? That's not a betrayal.
 And you never saw my father again that night?
 No.
 Well, then, there's nothing to judge here.
 So you blame Tycheek?
 It is betrayal.
 Judge yourself. But I don't blame you.
 Perhaps. But I don't need a traitor. I need a murderer.
 No, I don't. He returned to the Termitary immediately, and then the place was locked.  No one knows what goes on there now. There's talk of an uprising…
 An uprising? Why?
 I don't know.
 So what's your sin?
 You aren't guilty of anything.
 No, I'm guilty of something else. Guilty towards Isidor, too.
 How can that be?
 He has no part in this. He died before your father. True, it was on the same night, but it happened much, much earlier.
 I don't understand.
 And what does Oyun have to do with all this?
 We're working, we're working! It'll be done soon. You'll like it.
 Huh? You're doing something for me?
 The steppe rabble are dragging a bull through the Hindquarters. Celebrating their cruelty, the beasts…
 Yeah? Why are they doing that?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Craftsman
 Herb Bride
 Herb Bride
 Odongh
 Metal Scrap
 
 I'm dying.
 What's wrong with you?
 You deserve it.
 The sand plague. Keep your distance. And don't blame yourself. Just find your father's real killer, and I can die peacefully.
 I will.
 I will end them. You can be sure of that.
 Perhaps I'll forgive them. What would you say to that?
 You still have time left on this earth. To look your reflection in the eye each morning. How will you manage that?
 I was joking.
 What do you even know?
 
 
 Chief Notkin and his pack nest in this warehouse. Kids here trade for food and sharp objects.
 The Soul-and-a-Half Fortress
 
 Var the Hunchback buys organs.
 Lara Ravel's mansion. We used to call her Gravel, because she always had an edge on us. I can always have a rest at this house.
 The Shelter
 My father's house. My house. Closed.
 Bad Grief's Nest
 Grigory Filin, aka Bad Grief, reigns a small warehouse kingdom these days. He can sell anything under the counter.
 The local authorities often visit the place. But the town jail is in the same building.
 The Lump
 The Olgimskys' mansion. Far Vlad is the owner and master of the Bull Enterprise... but for many it's just "the Master."
 Father is dead. Should I still insist on getting home...?
 I let the traitor go. Not sure if Notkin wants to know or not.
 Something's brewing in a warehouse that belongs to kids.
 Well, I cut out the unneeded part. Let's see what Bad Grief thinks of it.
 Theater
 It hosts a hospital now.
 Rumor has it, a bizarre creature was captured here.
 Something tells me Big Vlad and I have things to discuss.
 Steppe people gather at Aspity's hospice.
 I know a good obstetrician all right... He'll cut whatever needs to be cut. Including railways.
 Olgimsky Jr. wants to see me.
 Vlad Olgimsky wants to see me. A dubious success.
 Town Hall
 Isidor Burakh's House
 
 Something's wrong here.
 One-eyed Var buys and sells human organs.
 Var's Place
 
 Why did Clara tell me that Katerina requires help? She seems fine. Her husband, however...
 
 
 Huzzah! It works!
 Grocery
 Clothes
 Pharmacy
 
 Isidor Burakh's murderer is caught, at last! The real one this time, it seems.
 Where? At the Rod again?
 No. I have a hunch that it's just another false positive.
 Yes. Saburov is home today. It is said that he is desperate… His authority seems to be falling apart.
 It's not a good time.
 Really? Didn't take long.
 
 
 Who are you?
 Who are <i>you?</i>
 I'm his son.
 Son… I can speak to a son. I'll answer to a son.
 You'll answer before the son, and the father, and the holy spirit.
 At the Kin we say, "There's no answer more honest than silence." And silence implies assent, doesn't it?
 I'm innocent.
 Right. Sorry, my mistake. Should I go now?
 There are no innocent men. The primordial sin weighs on us all.
 Give me a break.\nShrike, the militia boss, dragged me in here. He's had it out for me for the past three years.\nYes, I broke into the Kains' place. So? They don't need worldly things—the heavens sustain them. Why should I be treated like a murderer?
 The Kains? What do they have to do with this?
 You broke into the Kains' place? Great work, very crafty. Did my father go there?
 Well, Simon Kain was old Burakh's pal. That night I saw them parting near the Crucible, a few minutes past midnight.\nYour father told him, "I have three hours left, and you'll probably hold out for a bit longer." He must have known what fate awaited him.
 What do you mean?
 He knew who was going to murder him?
 Look, this whole mess is none of my business. But your father knew that he had three hours left to live. I ended up talking about it once when I'd had too much to drink, embellished a few things, and that's when Shrike took me in.\nBoth of them were gone on that night. Both your father and Simon Kain.
 So who killed them?
 Hell if I know. But it sure wasn't me. I was just passing by and overheard them talking, right? They sounded like they'd planned it all from the start. Get it?
 I do.
 No, I don't.
 That's what I'm talking about.
 Why?
 True, it doesn't sound like they were talking about murder. More like… both of them decided to die.\nOr maybe… I don't know, maybe there was poison in their blood and they only had a little time left to live.
 Poison?
 How do you figure that?
 I'm dying.
 What's wrong with you?
 You deserve it.
 The sand plague. Keep your distance. And don't blame yourself. Just find your father's real killer, and I can die peacefully.
 I will.
 I will end them. You can be sure of that.
 Perhaps I'll forgive them. What would you say to that?
 You still have time left on this earth. To look your reflection in the eye each morning. How will you manage that?
 I was joking.
 What do you even know?
 Unente, akhar. Here you are. Finally.
 How fares your kine, Khatangher? What did you want of me?
 Why'd you wait here? You could find me in the Town. I'm not hiding.
 …Who are you, Kindred? Do you remember anything of us? Can you feel your roots?
 I can.
 "Akhar" implies we're unequal. I don't like this.
 A terrible tragedy. Many die…\nI've seen this disease before. Your father did everything right. I'd give my honor and my life to not let it happen again. But since it already has, let us take advantage of this tragedy.\nLet us revive the Kin. You will do it, not me. And you are to rule it.
 "Take advantage"? What are you talking about, tangher?
 Our people withered by the year, so that the Town grew. It was built on our bones.\nNow it's the other way around. The Town withers, our people endure. It's time to revive the Kin.
 If only Father could hear you.
 I have information about your father—the how and why of his death. But that is a long conversation, and it will only happen when you act.\nGo to the Warrens. Kill the guards. Get inside.
 To the Termitary? What for?
 Our elders are a single, many-headed beast. Its single neck is Tycheek, the overseer of the Warrens.\nTell him I've returned. Tell them not to come out. You and I will prepare everything. Let them stay inside until the disease devours the whole Town. Then let them come out.
 You looked for mythical bulls among the steppe. The aurochs. Is that true?
 Rule? Me? I don't deserve the honor.
 True. You don't deserve the honor, akhar. You are no one yet.\nBut you will follow in your father's footsteps, then replace me. I'm already a dead man walking.
 Do you know how Father died?
 Why won't <i>you</i> go, kholboön?
 I tried to get close, but they shot at me. And I can't shoot. They kill on sight. I was wounded. Anyone else would have been killed.\nBut you will find a way in. Do you have a gun?
 Are you dying?
 "Kill." Easy for you to say. Do you think it's that simple?
 I'm a doctor, not a murderer.
 Death is nothing. Don't overvalue human life. People only matter as parts of an udurgh.\nA person is dissolved in "people." A person is dissolved in Earth. As a separate entity, they matter not at all, whether alive or dead.
 How can I help you?
 I was looking for ancient bulls. Odonghe said they'd heard them bellow far off.\nThey were mistaken. I walked the steppe for a long time. There are no more ancient bulls. They're extinct. The Town devoured them, as it devours us now, Khatangher.\nDon't let this loss be in vain. Go to the Warrens.
 I won't kill anyone. I'm not a butcher.
 You are a butcher. He who knows the Lines is a butcher. He who can dissect a great bull is a butcher. He who fears not blood.\nPay your price for your father's authority. It is always paid in blood.
 Don't you have anyone else to send?
 Is that the price I have to pay to learn about Father's last days?
 Yes. There is no other way.
 I'll come back to you with news from Tycheek.
 
 I'm half and half. My roots spread on both sides.
 No. I don't want to pay it.
 This is not my way… akhar.
 …Seven thousand dead, more or less.
 Are they in those sacks?
 Yes. I have not seen so many corpses since the Battle of the Fords.
 Are there survivors?
 Did you… count?
 Can't you hear the screams? There must be. But it hardly matters.
 You… feel sorry for them?
 I should say that I deserve more pity than they do. This is my death sentence, I believe.\nBut, oddly enough, it's them I think about. Even though they're beyond help.
 Have you already figured out what happened?
 A death sentence? Why?
 You were there?
 No. Not during the battle itself. I arrived the next day.
 Are there any survivors here?
 I do. They were bottled up in here by Olgimsky. I will soon find out if he knew about the infection or not.\nWould it be better for the Town if they roamed the streets, seeking food and blood? I doubt it. Would they run off into the steppe and spread infection throughout the country? I wonder.
 Capella's Wing
 The rooms of Victoria Olgimskaya, also known as Capella, are separate from her father's. Children can often be seen scurrying by her wing.
 Strange pantomime shows are performed here every night.
 The Rod
 The mansion of the Saburovs. This part belongs to Alexander, the Town's governor. Many doors are locked in this house.
 Aspity's Hospice
 The steppe people who can't find a better home flock together at Sahba's. Bizarre events occur here, sometimes.
 They wouldn't make it far. Without care, the infection kills within a day.
 I'm an inquisitor. I exist to solve clearly defined problems. If this town survives, so will I.\nThis mission is my last chance to prove my utility. If I fail… Let's just say I am not in good standing at the moment. I expect no lenience.
 Does that mean the Termitary is unlocked, now? Can the survivors come out?
 Curious.\nAlthough, even if the disease had crossed the steppe, technically I would have been beyond reproach. My task was to save the Town. I was never ordered to stop the epidemic.\nAlthough, who cares about formalities in my situation.
 How is it possible?
 How is your situation special?
 My feet ache.
 Feet… Feet are fine. What about the rest of you?
 The important thing is, you're alive, girl from Father's list.
 No. They won't let me out. Even though I'm… I'm superior, and they must listen! But no one does…\nNot enough toys here. Very boring. Is the outside more interesting?
 Just don't be scared when you walk out of this room. Don't look around, and think happy thoughts.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grace's Lodge
 Grace looks after the dead at the cemetery. This place smells of soil and milk.
 Termitary, Block #1
 A behemoth bunkhouse for the Bull Enterprise workers. Closed.
 Termitary, Block #2
 A behemoth bunkhouse for the Bull Enterprise workers. Closed.
 The Abattoir
 Used to be a temple. Now, a giant slaughterhouse. Off limits.
 Fellow Traveler
 Fellow Traveler
 Have we met before?
 No, we haven't.\nThey won't let anyone in to see me! Tell them to let guests in! Or I'll get angry again, like I did yesterday!
 Is that why your feet ache? Were you stomping around a lot?
 Also gums and guts, because I chewed on resin. And… because they won't give me anything tasty anymore. Did you bring anything nice?
 No… I don't have anything nice.
 So what kind of human are you? Why did you come?
 Tell me, kid… Did you ever leave this room? Do you know what's happening outside?
 Like anyone would listen to me here.
 Where will we go? Shekhen, yes? Tell me it's Shekhen! Be khara, what a great idea!
 Why go to Shekhen? It's deserted.
 It's spacious. We'll all find a place there.
 We don't need too much space. I'll take you in.
 And the rest of us, too?
 No. You alone.
 "Hello-ne"? What do you mean? I don't understand the word.
 Well, can you count? How many fingers am I showing to you now?
 Ten.
 No, there's one.
 Yes, it does! It's the same! How can you separate me from Khatanghe, nunehen zaila? You don't cut fingers from a hand! What a stupid idea, <i>helloning</i> someone! Ime beshe, we'll only leave together. \nThen we'll live together. Here, we won't live. It'll be great, yamar goe be!
 What a stubborn kid. Fine. I'll figure something out.
 One tiny kid speaking for all those people… Now I understand what Father meant.
 I came to get you.
 Me?
 Yes. We'll go outside now. Will you come?
 It's… not really. It's dangerous. To be honest, it's bad.
 But I'm brave! Aren't you?
 I have my ups and downs…
 Big Vlad
 Ah, Burakh… You don't have a wife yet, of course… Do you?
 Not yet.
 …And I doubt I ever will.
 Not anymore. But I used to.
 Neither do I… Not anymore.
 Victoria Olgimskaya died a while ago.
 Surprising to find you here, boös.
 Yes.
 I know you loved her. Everyone in the Town knows.
 I'm sorry.
 How did she die, boös Vlad?
 I dropped by to check… if everything's been executed exactly as I instructed. Why did I bother? Of course it was. Like anyone would dare disobey… Like anyone would…
 This is a shop, right?
 What did you order someone to do here?
 They used to sell knick-knacks and mementos here, long ago. That's where I met her. She was buying a brooch… We married the same year. It was fall, too…\nI returned here much later… How long was it? Eight years… They began selling meat. My meat, of course. Brooches… Who needs brooches…
 Indeed. Meat is more important.
 So it was your shop?
 Everything is mine here.
 Undeniably.
 Doesn't look like it. Otherwise, you wouldn't be here.
 What should I do, Burakh? Should I repair the shop? Or leave it like this? As a memento, heh heh heh…
 Repair it. Let them sell meat. It's profitable for everyone.
 Let it stay the way it is now. The music is too good.
 Twyrine
 Army Ration
 You come with a heavy heart, esegher.
 Did your people kill Rubin?
 His conscience killed him. He, too, walked around with a heavy heart. So it tore away and slipped from his chest.
 So your people have nothing to do with it?
 Why did he feel so guilty?
 He killed a man. We became the suspects. He knew, but did not come clean. Wanted to stall for time. Did his work while we were being killed for his sin.\nHis conscience finished him off. A decent enough man.
 Are you implying he killed himself? I don't believe it. That's not the kind of man he was.
 Whom did he kill?
 A big man. A strong man. A man who carried a whole world within him. A man who carried our town.\nWhy, do you need a name? Have you not enough worries as it is? You cannot avenge your father, so you grasp at opportunities to avenge a friend, too?
 What have you done to Rubin? Speak, ekhene! You know!
 Our hands never touched him. But eyes can touch. So we looked at him. Made him look at us. Made his conscience eat him, from the inside.
 Touched him with your eyes, huh?
 I don't want to avenge anyone… We need to care for the living, first. The dead will wait.
 Were you the one who organized this? Or were your elders?
 You can do that, too. Have you not tried?
 You're a merciless woman, Sahba. No forgiveness?
 I prefer manual labor.
 What does it have to do with me? We, Khatanghe, feel everything together. We hold no council. We give no orders.\nThe elders listen, the Kin acts. Shekhen wakes up again. Have you heard of the old village?
 I have. Was Rubin's fate decided there?
 The Ear, yes. I've been there.
 Everything is decided there. The soil there is thin, so one can hear everything.\nUnderstand, esegher, that only in your world do people decide who lives and who dies. Think so highly of themselves. We do not think, we listen. Everything happens on its own.
 If that was true, you'd still be walking on all fours.
 You're in too much of a hurry to call me that. I am not your father.
 Consider a flock of birds. Birds give no advice, no speeches. They take wing all at once and go where they need. For they know how to listen. They know not the concept of self. They fear death not.\nYou'll become like that, too. All who come to Shekhen understand.
 I won't. I'm different.
 Perhaps later, when I am smarter.
 That place is a ruin. It offers no understanding.
 You come with a heavy heart, esegher.
 Did your people kill Rubin?
 Rubin died of his conscience. He, too, walked around with a heavy heart. So it tore away and slipped from his chest.
 So your people have nothing to do with it?
 Why did he feel so guilty?
 He killed a man. We became the suspects. He knew, but did not come clean. Wanted to stall for time. Did his work while we were being killed for his sin.\nHis conscience finished him off. A decent enough man.
 Are you implying he killed himself? I don't believe it. That's not the kind of man he was.
 Whom did he kill?
 A big man. A strong man. A man who carried a whole world within him. A man who carried our town.\nWhy, do you need a name? Have you not enough worries as it is? You cannot avenge your father, so you grasp at opportunities to avenge a friend, too?
 What have you done to Rubin?
 I don't want to avenge anyone… We need to care for the living, first. The dead will wait.
 Our hands never touched him. But eyes can touch. So we looked at him. Made him look at us. Made his conscience eat him, from the inside.
 Touched him with your eyes, huh?
 Who organized this? Your elders?
 You can do that, too. Have you not tried?
 Do you know no forgiveness?
 I prefer manual labor.
 We, Khatanghe, feel everything together. We hold no council. We give no orders.\nThe elders listen, the Kin acts. Shekhen wakes up again. Have you heard of the old village?
 I have. Was Rubin's fate decided there?
 The Ear, yes. I've been there.
 Everything is decided there. The soil there is thin, so one can hear everything.\nUnderstand, esegher, that only in your world do people decide who lives and who dies. Think so highly of themselves. We do not think, we listen. Everything happens on its own.
 If that was true, you'd still be walking on all fours.
 You're in too much of a hurry to call me that. I am not your father.
 Consider a flock of birds. Birds give no advice, no speeches. They take wing all at once and go where they need. For they know how to listen. They know not the concept of self. They fear death not.\nYou'll become like that, too. All who come to Shekhen understand.
 I won't. I'm different.
 Perhaps later, when I am smarter.
 That place is a ruin. It offers no understanding.
 So you say you know how to connect things… which is why you cut, rip, and break them. Just like your father.
 Rubin made a cure for the sand pest, and he made it from strange blood. And you know a lot about blood.
 Rubin… Who's Rubin?
 My father's apprentice. Didn't he come to you?
 A friend of mine. So you don't know him…
 Lots of idiots found their way into Isidor's circle. Although I guess not all of them were completely stupid…\nSo he made a cure, huh? You sure? From blood? So its price will rise…
 No. That was special blood. Human won't do.
 Fat chance. Blood's only getting cheaper these days.
 A cure, huh… You're a big talker.\nWhat does a smartass like you want from me? Advice? Here: if you tell on me to that unholy wench, I'll claw my way out of hell to drag you back down with me. Got it?
 Like she needs you… Tell me, has anyone ever brought you unusual blood?
 I won't tell on you. And in return, you'll tell me where to find the most unusual blood in this town.
 No. Although…
 Well?
 Why are you smiling?
 Herb Brides dance with the earth at the Ear. Did you know? To make twyre bloom better. Cover themselves in some sort of mud that they call blood.\nYou can probably pick its sample there if you want. I bet you haven't yet tried to brew a cure from mud, huh? Ha ha ha…
 I'm asking a serious question, but it's just a joke to you. Damn it…
 You know what? I'll pay them a visit.
 Did you hear what Mother told you? Our body is whole. We won't let you break it. She won't let you break it.\nDid you understand, Khatangher? We leave only as a whole.
 Then go. What's holding you here?
 Yeah, yeah, I got it. You're all a single organism. The girl's not leaving without you all.
 We want to look him in the eye. Touch his eyes with ours.
 Yeah, I know all too well what you mean by that.
 I'll bring you the person responsible.
 Happy now?
 I didn't expect you'd actually come.
 There wasn't enough… I sent people to seize him and drag him to my place, but he was long gone…\nSo I came here to rescue the boy. But he wasn't here, either…
 So you risked everything for your son?
 I didn't expect this from you, boös. I took you for a completely heartless creature.
 Help me get out of here, will you?
 I'll try. I'll lead the Kin away from here. That's what it was all about, anyway.
 That's not how it works. You must be held accountable for your crimes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubin is dead. And I think I know who is responsible for this.
 
 
 Who killed Rubin? The Kin, who spilled no blood? His conscience, which could never find peace? The friend, who failed in his task, my task?\n\nIt doesn't matter, I suppose. In the end, Stakh is dead.
 That's all right… That's all right… We'll take it all back. Our feet are firmly planted. Even if it all comes crumbling down, even if every single one of them dies, we will rebuild it.
 Do you know what's going on in the Termitary, boös?
 Have you… forgotten something?
 Your son's in danger. He intends to go to the Termitary. To calm your people down.
 Listen… Take care of my daughter. She's the last of our family now.
 I'll drag you out of this, too.
 I will.
 You won't. We're done for. Just save my daughter! Give me your word you'll save her.
 I will.
 It's impossible. She's beyond salvation now.
 Our family's over, Burakh. It's time… to pay. My daughter is no more… Did you come to gloat?
 No. Just to watch.
 What can I do for you?
 Nothing. Forgive me if I ever wronged you.
 I do.
 God is merciful.
 The victims…
 Better ask me how many survivors. Not a lot.
 To make the Factory work again… at a third of its power, at least… to cover the most urgent deliveries… Are there a thousand left, at least?
 Go and count yourself. Those are your people, boös.
 I have special people on payroll who do just that… but they have no way of getting inside. Or… maybe you can guide them in? Since you've apparently found a hole.
 They're waiting for you, boös.
 And they're seeking my blood? I'll go… but not right now. Later. When things calm down.\nGo back to your business, my boy. Thanks for the news, but it's nothing new. So go.
 Go to them, boös. Now. They want to look you in the eye.
 Your son is going to the Termitary.
 What for?
 To confess. He was the one who locked up the Termitary. You didn't even know, did you?
 The whelp… The idiotic whelp… I didn't know? <i>I</i> didn't know?!
 So you did?
 That whelp is too cocky, thinking he's responsible for anything… Too eager to take my place…\nNo, it's a bit too early for him to get in my way. <i>I</i> am the Master… This is <i>my</i> business. <i>I</i> will bear the consequences.
 So what's your plan?
 …I'm sending people to seize that whelp and get him over here. Let him wallow in his conscience here… Guilty, pah! Responsible, my ass!
 Don't you think you should go there instead?
 
 
 Are you out of your mind, my boy? I'm not going anywhere now. And I would advise you follow my example.
 Scared?
 Your son is going there in your stead. I just wanted to let you know.
 Who do you take me for? You dare bully me? You dare push <i>me?</i> I'll rip all your throats out! And I won't even break a sweat! You pathetic weeds, you mindless calves…
 I warned you, boös.
 Better you go to them now… than they come to you later. Let them look you in the eye. That's how they say it.
 So do I. I saw them. Else I wouldn't be here.
 If you go to them now, you'll do it as a master. But if you linger, your role will change.
 Idiot! Oh, what an idiot! He still takes them for people. It's all fun and games to him… but they're not people, they're bloodthirsty beasts. They'll tear his head off.
 So you'll surrender yourself in his stead?
 They just want to look you in the eye.
 You are a gullible kid, Master Burakh… You have the heart of a dove. If you value your life so little, go to them yourself… Your legs are still young. But spare me your ridiculous ideas. I am a sane man.
 I warned you. If things turn bad, it'll be your fault.
 They will, believe me.
 I'll send my people to seize that dimwit and bring him here. He can remain… in my custody for a while. It's for the best.\nRemember how you refused my protection… how that turned out?
 Everything turned out fine.
 Where is he now? Do you know?
 In that ruined house with the well, as always.
 Who knows…? He doesn't report to me.
 Find him on your own. You have enough people.
 Yeah. My overshoes.
 You're a funny man, Burakh… Read too many romantic novels, do you? Keep to your anatomy books…
 What do you mean?
 What do books have to do with it? Those are your people. You need to go. Not him.
 
 Now is not a good time. I'm headed out.
 Why?
 Preparing for your final journey?
 Have you heard what happened with the Termitary?
 I have.
 The Kin are no more.
 Leave Father out of this. It was me. I did it.
 …What do you mean? <i>You?</i>
 Stop this. They were doomed.
 No, Burakh, they were not. They could have fled. Could have cured themselves. Could have survived, if they'd had any freedom of movement at all…
 Perhaps.
 I ordered the Termitary shut, Burakh. Not my father. Me. Just before you arrived. Father covered for me later…
 Why did you do it?
 There was a riot there, or so I was told. Now I understand what scared them… but back then, I wasn't thinking about that at all.
 What were you thinking about?
 Back then, I thought Father's wrath was the worst possible threat they could face. I was wrong… but no one could have known about this plague!\nI was wrong. But now, I'll make it right. I'll go to them.
 Why go there? You can't fix anything.
 "If, if, if."
 Why did he do it?
 We have a complicated relationship. Haven't I told you already? Father believes that his will the only thing that matters; that all decisions are his own.\nTo his credit, this includes his unpopular decisions, too.
 Did you know about the plague? Why did you lock the Termitary?
 
 
 Messenger
 Oh, I will… I've no plan to tremble at the sight of them… <i>They</i> will cower with their tails between their legs. I am the power. I am the authority. And they know it.
 They've changed. Recent events have transformed them. Sand pest does that to people.
 Why go there… Why go there? <i>Why go there!</i>\nBecause I can't <i>not</i> go, Burakh. Because this is <i>my</i> doing. Because I must see the place. And look them in the eye.
 They want your father's blood, but they won't refuse yours.
 All the more reason to go.
 Don't go. Please.
 Go. This is the right thing to do.
 Tell them to leave Father alone.
 I'll try.
 It's useless.
 Everything is as it should be, Burakh. As it should.
 You have an odd understanding of duty.
 You're weak. This is the easiest way out.
 I truly wanted to be a good master for them, Burakh. They're a wonderful people… I still believe that.\nThey're not animals. They're… water. Father took them for beasts, so they reflected his expectations. Shifted to fit that shape.
 What did you plan to do? Educate them?
 Why are you still alive…?
 Are you kidding? It's the other way around.\nI wanted to preserve their culture. Their language. Their rites. To transform the whole business, so it wouldn't… <i>devolve</i> them into cattle!
 And turn the Abattoir back into a temple? Your factory wouldn't have lasted long.
 No need for such extremes. Slowly, step by step, I could find a way to make the Kin live in peace with the Town.\nThey could just herd the cattle. We have enough workers, after all.
 Sounds utopian.
 Yes, Burakh, it <i>is</i> a utopia. Everyone in this town is trying to build one. Didn't you notice? Everyone is trying to make something new, something no one before them has ever made.
 Yeah, I've noticed.
 Cat's out of the bag now.
 What do you mean?
 What are you doing here?
 I sympathize with the Olgimskys, I do. But the father and son were too different, you see. Incompatible. Hence the catastrophe.\nIt's always like that with them… with this town, too. The gears grind; they can't move in harmony. And we see the results…
 Time sets everything in its place. Each had his own vision of the Bull Enterprise… They got in each other's way, the father and son. Now there will be calm, and the gears will turn as before.\nBut <i>why?</i> Why does calm have to come at such a steep price…? To hell with that damned Factory! But why do we have to make these unbearable choices?
 What makes you think only one of them will survive?
 One of them must go to the Termitary. And I think it'll be the Younger. He's firmly decided.\nBut I went to the Elder… I think it's better for him to go, rather than the Younger. If I were him, I'd go in my son's stead… But no one would let me speak to him…
 Young Vlad decided to go to the Termitary? Why?
 His conscience. I was just with him—I spoke to him. About everything…\nIn the end, he's going. How can I stop him? I'm sorry it happened this way… I shouldn't have paid him that visit.
 Were you the one who told him about the Termitary?
 He'd have found out anyway. He was keeping a close eye on it. If not today, tomorrow.\nI thought it would be better if he learned it from me. I wanted to comfort him. It wasn't his fault.
 I'm familiar with your sort of "comfort." You make everyone feel guilty.
 You witch… You probably pushed him to do it in the first place!
 Is he at his place? I'll talk him out of it myself.
 Like hell you will! If even <i>I</i> failed…\nAnd you won't get there in time, anyway. He's already on his way.
 I bet you haven't even tried.
 I'll get there in time.
 That's all right. I have a better idea…
 Be khara, neither wisdom nor strength speak through you now. We hear pity. It is an absurd feeling. Leave it to women.
 I can see the hunger in your eyes. What else do you want from me?
 And where is Oyun? He wasn't here with us when we were dying. The fire forged us anew. We are a new people now.\nHe did not burn here with us. He did not mix with our new body.
 Neither did I. So what?
 You've done well, yargachin. All Lines lead to the heart, yes? All converge in the same spot.\nThis is the spot where our fate connects to yours.
 How did the Olgimskys get here?
 You are very wise, yargachin. You chose not to interfere. Not to touch anyone. Not to spread the infection of knowledge.\nNow we have both murderers, not just one. Both came here of their own volition. Neither knew of the other's plans.\nEvil always devours itself.
 Let them go in peace.
 Father and son are of the same stock. You are one with your father, aren't you? Where once he was, now you stand. \nA body is whole. A people is whole. It lives within you. You live through it. Isn't that so?
 It is so.
 No.
 What do you want of this man? He isn't innocent. His guilt will burn him from within. We will only make sure the fire doesn't fade.
 …That's what you did to Rubin!
 Let him go. That's my request.
 We want you to take your rightful place among our people. To rule us. We need strength. Authority. Accept it. Hold its burden. Be our father, yargachin.
 What do you mean?
 No. I don't want to lose myself.
 You'll wash your hands with blood and lose yourself slowly so that your people live. You'll eat fire to see your Khatanghe live. You'll be responsible for the blood we spill.\nYour burden. The yoke of the powerful. Do we have your word?
 No. This isn't my path.
 Why have you come, yargachin?
 Aren't you happy to see me?
 We'd rather see boös, Fat Vlad. That's who we were expecting.
 Tough luck. There's no need to spill blood. Leave both Olgimskys alone.
 I'll take care of them.
 You can't take care of anyone, not yet. You're no one. You run from fate like a hare.\nBut you can still become yourself.
 How?
 No.
 What do you mean, no?
 Just in case. The answer is no. You had a request, did you not?
 I see.
 Yes. It's about the Olgimskys.
 I plan to have a long conversation with all three Olgimskys.\nHm… I can tell by your look not all of them remain. What happened?
 They lie in a pit in the Termitary. The workers plan an execution.
 Big Vlad went to the Termitary to protect his son.
 Young Vlad went to the Termitary to protect his father.
 I'm sorry. But I will not interfere. That is not what my purpose is.
 What is it, then?
 Do you really think I'm about to explain it to you, in detail? Please don't dispel my impression that you're a smart man.
 In that case, I think I should just go.
 Steppe Woman
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Father is dead. Sahba is dead. Oyun doesn't desire power. The Kin have one real leader now: Overseer Tycheek.
 
 
 All questions seem to lead to the Kin. Father's murderer? His debt? The damned udurgh? Tycheek, the Kin's voice, will explain.\n\nBut he's in the Termitary. I'll have to fight my way in.
 
 
 
 No guards. Has the Termitary been opened? If so, where's the crowd of survivors?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I saw one of the Termitary's rooms in a dream. I believe it was Tycheek's place.
 
 
 Neither the Kin nor Taya agree to her being separated from the people. The only way to save her from that dead place is together with them.
 
 
 The Kin want to look in the eyes of the man who locked them in the Termitary: Vlad Olgimsky. Vlad Olgimsky…
 In the Olgimsky family, Big Vlad is the one making decisions. But I doubt it'll be easy to convince him to throw himself at the Kin's mercy. Although, given the consequences...
 Young Vlad is more flexible than his father and easier to reach an agreement with. But he's not the person in charge.
 Young Vlad is more flexible and easier to come to an agreement with than his father. But in the Olgimsky house, he's not the person in charge.
 Aglaya Lilich
 
 
 Move along, move along... what do you want here? Having a death wish, are you? If they see you, they'll attack, no questions asked.
 Why don't you attack me then?
 I was just... looking.
 Me, I'm having a wonderful time here, heavenly dew dissolving in my chest. It's like I'm seeing God and his angels.
 Dew, you say? That's an early symptom of the sand pest. Dew in the chest and angels singing.
 Ah, so, not so sober? Got it.
 Are you for real?
 Absolutely. I'm a doctor myself. But I <i>can</i> help you.
 Nah, just kidding.
 ...Right, and I am to lead you in, secretly, and then keep mum? I've seen your kind before.\nFat Vlad would flay me alive for that, and Saburov would pour salt all over me to make sure I remember my duties!
 So you're a smart one. But the protective potion is real. I take it myself.
 In that case, forget it.
 ...Look, here's the deal. We're talking six... no, seven vials of your potion, not one. 'Cause I'm a family man. And don't even think about offering cash.
 Deal.
 Seven? Don't you know that greed is a sin?
 Nah, pal. Look for someone with more free time on their hands.
 Eight it is then. Should we keep talking?
 Whatever.
 No. That would be enough talking.
 Do you have it?
 Here you go. Just be quiet.
 Nah, just checking if you're still breathing, pal.
 How many times do I have to tell you riff-raff... There's a quaranteent! So if you poke your nose in here one more time, you're over, dove. Got it?
 By "over", do you mean dead?
 Got it.
 Don't "dove" me. I'm a bigger creature.
 Wanna check?
 No.
 Brawl? I'm in. Go for it!
 
 
 Young Vlad considers himself responsible for what happened. He intends to accept punishment.
 
 
 It was Young Vlad who locked up the Termitary. He deems himself responsible for what happened to the Kin and will go to them voluntarily.\n\nIs this the outcome I want?
 
 
 Big Vlad considers himself responsible for everything. It seems he loves his son more than he shows.\n\nHe will replace Young Vlad before the Kin.
 
 
 Both Olgimskys faced the Kin's judgement themselves, without me.
 Neither Olgimsky faced the Kin, but the Kindred do not care. They never do.\n\nThey still want a leader.
 
 
 Fat Vlad knows of his son's plans now. No need to talk to Vlad the Younger. He must be stopped before he causes harm…\n\nI doubt either of them will come to the Termitary now.
 Young Vlad is in the Kin's hands now. He was a decent man, but he must answer for his actions.
 Big Vlad is in the Kin's hands now. He wasn't responsible for what happened, but he accepted the punishment nonetheless.
 The Kin will listen to me now. But they can't move forward, torn apart as they are. I need to heal their wounds.
 The Stillwater
 Eva Yan's house. An observatory of unseen skies. Used to be a guest house for outsiders.
 The Polyhedron
 The tower of children. Defies the laws of physics.
 The Willows
 The house of a singer named Anna Angel. But it used to belong to a different girl.
 The Trammel
 The mansion of Yulia Liuricheva, logistician and mathematician. Also the Town's library. Rarely visited.
 The Cathedral
 Empty and never visited by anyone. It's unclear why it was even built.
 State inquisitor Aglaya Lilich works here.
 The Crucible
 The Kains' mansion. This house belongs to Georgiy Kain, called Judge by the townsfolk.
 The Kains' mansion. This house belongs to Victor Kain, the younger brother.
 The Kains' mansion. This house belongs to Maria Kaina, the family's heir.
 The Station
 The umbilical cord connecting us to the outside world begins here. This part is for cargo.
 The Station
 The umbilical cord connecting us to the outside world begins here. This part is for humans.
 Haruspex's Lair
 It provides Father's alembic, a bed, light, warmth, and a roof over my head. And a locker to keep my things safe. What else can you ask for?\n\nPeople who need me will sometimes wait around this place.
 Tannery
 Bull skins are tanned in this part of the Factory.
 The Broken Heart \n(Workshop 2)
 Cannery
 Meat gets cured and preserved in this part of the Factory.
 Dilapidated Shack
 A well is dug inside this house. Young Vlad is seen around here sometimes.
 Rubin's Apartment
 Stakh Rubin lives here. But he's rarely home.
 Rubin's Hideout
 Stakh Rubin does mysterious work here at night. This hideout was granted to him by Bad Grief.
 Foreman Oyun
 
 
 Act IV
 Bone Stake Lot. In the old days, bull sacrifices took place here.
 The pub of Andrey Stamatin, an architect who would rather break bones than build homes. The barkeep buys herbs.
 Ferryman
 Can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking. But Charon won't even look at you unless you carry a coin or, in this case, a token.
 Can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking. But Charon won't even look at you unless you carry a coin or, in this case, two tokens.
 Nina's Tomb
 Nina Kaina the Wild has not found her resting place here. Even in death, she remains passionate and restless.
 Victoria's Tomb
 Victoria Olgimskaya the Warm has not found her resting place here. She rests across all the Town's streets, houses, and yards.
 Murky's Corner
 This abandoned train car was turned into a living place. Perhaps it'll travel to the ocean one day?
 Crow Stone
 I met the Plague here… I think.
 Gumstone
 Gravel, Bad Grief, Stakh, and I used to leave each other notes here when we were kids.
 
 
 The nature of this disease is unknown. Father could defeat these, too. If only I could remember his lessons…\n\nI only know an iota of what he did. But I'll make a panacea.
 Father's death was so untimely. I learned too little from him. \n\nNo one will hand me a recipe. I'll have to work through trial and error—blindly.
 Wrong. Trying out infected tissues leads nowhere. I need to think outside the box here.
 The panacea requires a non-existent component. I need to pour a paradox into the alembic.\n\nBut I refuse to give in. Sooner or later, I'll find the answer. Or it will find me.
 The medicine has been produced. But there's very little of it. For now, it's more proof of concept than a solution.\n\nStill, I think I'll soon find the right person to share this discovery with.
 To defeat an enemy, one must understand it. And I don't mean a biological study. What <i>is</i> this plague?
 I know slightly more about the plague now. I need to keep searching. Even silly rumors may hold a grain of truth.
 This outbreak is no mere cholera, pox, or flu. It has a hidden meaning, one you can't study with a microscope. \n\nI need to keep investigating.
 They say not all victims of the sand pest die. They say there was a will behind the outbreak. They say it came from Earth.\n\nIt's not just a disease.
 The plague has a voice. Now I'm certain of it. Can it truly have a personality, a mind, a will?
 Charm
 You hear and come to us. You are, truly, a good doctor.
 Who are you?
 A mere reflection, sir.
 Where's your owner?
 I reflect the house. Why have you come, sir?
 No reason, just passing by.
 Honestly? To see if there's anything worth looting.
 Or so you think. But other forces bring you here, and not into another house.\nYou, doctor, hear the call of bodies lain with sickness, rasping breath and falt'ring heart. You came when needed. Do so more often.
 Why?
 That is for you to figure out, Burakh. Perhaps this place designs to share a story of toil and trouble. Perhaps it proffers gifts. Perhaps it wants to seize something from you.
 There's nothing I have that it could take.
 I'm more of a home invader right this instant. A burglar, I suppose.
 A "reflection"? Whose?
 Houses have souls? Huh. I didn't know that.
 The Town has need of ways to speak to those who cannot speak her language, sir.
 A town is just streets and buildings. I can tell what's alive from what isn't.
 So what is this house trying to tell me?
 How about it get me something to eat, first?
 I would, but people get in my way.
 A wheelwright used to call this house his home. The only such craftsman in town. Our mills are not for making wheels; they are for breaking bulls to gristle, bone, and blood.
 Where did the whole thing with hanging wheels everywhere start?
 What kind of wheels? Cart wheels?
 Not wheels that bear a load; wheels to adorn a home. When wood was easily found, he'd make them.
 Whatever for?
 A wheel's a charm of labor's slow contentment; a circle, cycle, spinning sun of hope.
 Are they? They make me think of… eyes.
 A wheel's at rest; a line's in motion, lost. It is a frightful fancy, time's arrow; a line that cuts ever forward. Better to see the world swung around in a sling. For death cannot exist where circles turn.
 But eternity is its own form of horror.
 Bah. Waste of good timber.
 Labor, eh? Our town has its hands in the muck but its head in the sky.
 What troubles you about that, Burakh? The filth of carving meat and tanning hides? It ties us down to Earth and lays the deep foundation 'neath a tall and shining factory…
 A dream factory? One that churns out futile fantasies of a better life?
 A factory for processing people into ideas?
 What troubles you about <i>that,</i> Burakh? That's how the circle turns into a line; an arrow fired into the darkened void. So wheels may warm a home more than a hearth.
 …Does all this circular logic <i>do</i> anything?
 \n…Why not just draw a line in the first place, then!
 It looks like adherents of the Kains live in this house.
 This hollow house was home to water carters. From springs they'd bring their barrels every Thursday. Fortune, mere luck, returned them to us before the Town was struck, lock'd, quarantined.
 How long can this water supply last?
 I've noticed the drinking fountains in the streets. They weren't there when I left.
 I reckon five or maybe six more days. Depending mainly on the people's thirst. No one is there to watch the barrels.
 Guards will probably be posted soon.
 An aqueduct, left sorely incomplete by great Olgimsky masters, works sometimes. The Gorkhon's water can't be purified.
 Meaning the aqueduct might fail any day?
 Indeed. Our hope still rides the water carts. But quarantine has locked them in, empty.
 So we'll be running out of water soon.
 If the water runs out, we'll drink twyrine.
 It's odd that there's been no panic about the water so far. I suppose not everyone's figured it out yet…
 Two families live within these walls, and both have sought Stamatin's pub to pawn their last few heirlooms, sir. The man is buying gold.
 What could he want with gold?
 Who is this Stamatin?
 Perhaps the man has hope to spare, and thinks this sickness comes and goes while gold remains. If not, he knows a thing or two we don't.
 Why does an architect own a pub? Is he that well-off?
 An architect; two brothers: Peter, Andrey. One dreamed up the Polyhedron's shape; the other dreamed up a way to keep his brother safe. While Peter architects his buildings, Andrey architects his schemes.
 If he's an architect, why does he own a pub?
 A brave fellow, he makes and sells that dire faerie, twyrine. Perhaps he was the man who first distilled the drink that grips the town.
 Twyrine isn't for everyone.
 A dangerous drink.
 Peter's a great lover of twyrine, sir. Indeed, the Town itself exemplifies what twyrine does to living bodies.
 What do you mean?
 Agreed…
 Ingenious fancy worked its way from dream to matter. Such reality: fierce, bright, burning, unendurable light of reason. Only a child can bear it. Only children can probe the Polyhedron, see within it.
 I've heard of that.
 I'd love to take a look for myself.
 Don't despair… Even a torn family can be sewn back together. Sometimes, grief can be the common thread.
 That's what Brother says, too…
 Does he live here with you?
 Yes. Any deed is twice as difficult without a father…
 Is he okay now?
 No. I failed.
 But you gave him the pills! Did they not work?
 I couldn't reduce his infection. If I gave him the right pill, that might have delayed it…
 What use is delaying it?! He'll still die! Only with more suffering…
 You don't know what you're talking about. As long as he lives, a cure can be sought.
 I chose the wrong pill.
 So how do we cure him? When will you know?
 Eventually. These things take time.
 Any delay on the path to death is a victory.
 If only I could figure out what it was…
 Oyun's Reflection
 Nine years ago my master woefully took the job of foreman to the Abattoir. Olgimsky sought a kinsman he could trust to force his will upon the Kin, to quell rebellion 'gainst the bitter yoke of toil.
 I remember that. Everyone hated him.
 I believe the Kin despises him.
 The Kin will follow strength as rule of law.\nOyun is not a fool; he knew enough to see: One does not rule by giving orders.\nNo man can rule the Kin. Tycheek or Sahba aside, only Elder Burakh came close.
 The Kin obeys neither strength nor spirit.
 Why would the Kin need a ruler at all? The Kin are a hive.
 The Kin can only listen, like a realm of infants. Follow no laws, but feel keenly. What do they feel, Burakh?
 Hell if I know.
 Same as everyone. Pain. Anxiety. Sorrow. Hope.
 Oyun does know his place; no king of shreds and patches, but the King's silent shadow.\nHe dreams of one to take his place; a man to lead the Kin upriver, towards the long-forgotten past. But strong he is.
 Does the Kin <i>need</i> the ways of the past? Isn't it better to look to the future?
 What is strength, Reflection?
 The Kin are slaves, gristle for the mill Olgimsky built to drown the Town in coin.\nThis road leads to no future but our end.
 Same fate awaits us all.
 Who could have thought such a hulking man worries about such issues.
 Do you believe yourself strong, Burakh? Then tell me what this strength is born from.
 Your master knows the answer. Strength lies in fear.
 Strength is the power to say "no."
 
 Survivor
 
 
 Wait a bit longer. I'll speak my mind soon.
 No. Wait a bit. I'll take a look at his body first.
 [Chest has been punctured. Massive wound, couldn't have been a knife. Some massive, cone-shaped object. A horn or claw, maybe.]
 [I should pull away the fabric covering the body, now.]
 [I've seen the vital part. Shouldn't investigate further. Could be seen as blasphemous.]
 [Skin dry to the touch, suspicious. Unusual degree of xerosis. He wasn't that old…]
 [I should continue the examination.]
 [Enough. This is my father.]
 [Soil under his fingernails. Unlike him. Always kept his hands clean…]
 [Three oddities, then. The murder weapon, the dry skin, and the condition of his hands.]
 [Enough. This is a cemetery, not a morgue. A fuller picture would require an autopsy. I refuse to do it.]
 I gave Patches the wrong antibiotic. He's just as sick as before. And I can't administer more drugs to him today.
 He was murdered. That's all I needed to know. Murdered.
 Yes, Father was murdered. But… I got the impression that something was unwell with him even before his death. It doesn't matter now, though.
 He was murdered. That's all I needed to know. Murdered.
 Yes, Father was murdered. But… I got the impression that something was unwell with him even before his death. It doesn't matter now, though.
 
 I chose not to examine Father's body. I just… can't.
 The Body
 Mother's Attendant
 The Mother Superior
 Bull Blood
 Useless for crafting. Show this to Dankovsky?
 Living Blood
 This flask is heavy like a rock. This is special blood. What can it be used for?
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 Painkiller
 
 
 
 The Kin resent Rubin. If I don't get rid of the Kindred, Stakh will be locked in his Warehouse until the Gorkhon runs dry.
 Four people are waiting for Stakh in the Warehouses. If I want to protect my friend, I'll have to clear his way.
 
 
 Rubin is safe for today. Tomorrow, I'll see if it was worth it.
 I won't get into fights with my own Khatanghe over Stakh. If he's angered the Kin somehow, that's his problem to solve.
 
 
 They're camping on Rubin's doorstep again. Getting closer, like wolves.\n\nIt's hard to deal with so many opponents at once. But all I need is to lure them away from Rubin so that he can flee.
 
 
 
 I think Stakh has successfully fled. Now all I need is to survive myself.
 I did not help Stakh.
 Barkeep
 Murky
 Manager
 If you come into your legacy, you will know more. I am its keeper, and I will give you everything that is now rightfully yours.\nBut we can not abandon your father's body. By the rites of our people, he should have been buried yesterday.
 What are we to do with it?
 Indeed. If you abandon your wife, she will just embrace someone else. And that is dangerous.
 Is that so? Why?
 I don't care.
 
 
 Soon, a bull will walk the Town's streets to touch it for the last time. Then it will be slaughtered.
 Craftsman
 Craftsman
 
 
 It's spreading across Earth—the lower Town. Between the Gullet and the Abattoir.
 Thanks, Judge. I know what part of town is called Earth.
 Perhaps it won't cross the Gullet after all. Perhaps they'll barricade the bridges in time.
 Two architects live in Earth: Andrey and Peter Stamatin. Both geniuses, each in his own way. Please, take them into your care. You could let the whole Town die, but these two must survive!
 Why?
 I don't even know them.
 Because you won't find minds like theirs anywhere else on the whole continent. We hunted them for much too long. \nMy brother Simon collected many brilliant specimens in this town, you know. It is an ark.
 Where do they live?
 Why don't <i>you</i> take care of them, then?
 You are a doctor. You took the oath.
 All right. I'll keep an eye on them.
 Yes, an oath to all people. Not just to your handful of chosen ones.
 Peter lives in a loft in the Tanners. Andrey, though, rarely leaves the Broken Heart—his pub below the Factory. \nI put my hopes on you, doctor. Pay them a visit as soon as you can.
 I know that place—it's a twyrine den. I had no idea it's run by a genius.
 I'll take a look.
 The strict sanitary measures… Why? Will they help us maintain decency? This isn't plague, cholera, or pox. It's not some unstudied strain of flu. I have a suspicion that this is not a medical affliction at all.
 How can I help, Judge?
 People get sick and die. It's medical, all right.
 You are a steppe man. This affliction is clearly a steppe thing. In this situation, I'd rather rely on Burakh's son than on Dankovsky, even though he's a big-city star. The roots of this place go back to the Kin. To the ground. Or so I should think.
 I barely remember anything about my heritage anymore.
 The Kin consider me an outsider.
 Who cares?
 This entity has a purpose. A will. It wants something from us. It plays by some kind of rules. But what are those rules? How do you understand earth? Nature? These things—they speak a language that had been extinct long before we humans even stepped forth on the stage of Creation.
 Look, I'm not a philosopher.
 I would love to be your student, Judge.
 We'll see if we survive.
 …What does that mean for me?
 Yes, yes, I know. We're supposed to stay indoors. And the Tower's inhabitants do just that, I make sure my people follow the law. But I am Caspar Kain; your laws don't apply to me.
 What's up there in the Tower?
 Caspar Kain? So you're the one they call Khan? I've been looking for you.
 Wrong. They apply to everyone. Leaders most of all.
 The Tower is home to youth. Almost three hundred people inside. All safe. Like I said, I observe the quarantine. They're not allowed to leave.
 Why are <i>you</i> here, then?
 Who else is to risk their life but me?
 If you get sick, you'll bring the infection back in there with you. What were you thinking?
 Do you take me for an idiot, or a negligent bastard? Those are my people. I'm responsible for them. If I get sick, I won't ever return, <i>obviously.</i>
 What makes you think you'll notice immediately?
 Do they really obey? Who are you to disallow anything?
 I am Khan. Son of Victor Kain.
 You knew my father, Isidor Burakh. What business did you have with him?
 We talked. I was curious what Simon saw in him.
 Simon?
 Excuse me, were you born yesterday? Simon Kain. The head of our family. My uncle. The immortal man. The one who died two days ago. The one we can't live without. \nHe molded this town into what it is. He kept its spirit aflame. Do you honestly have no idea who he was?
 I'm a local. And I know about Simon. Mind your manners.
 A brave lad, are you… So, why are you here?
 To negotiate with Notkin over there. Any more questions?
 Are you two friends?
 We're enemies, after a fashion. His Soul-and-a-Halves against my Dogheads. But we're negotiating an armistice now. If he lets go of his usual bullheadedness, it might happen.\nAre you happy now? Can we get back to our business?
 No, I'm not done yet. Do you know how my father died?
 I see. And what business do you have with Notkin?
 Why do you ask? It's not like he's your son.
 No. But we got to know each other, in a way. What are you up to?
 You're a doctor. I respect your future heroism. So I am offering you an overabundance of politesse.
 What are you two up to?
 Do you know who I am?
 No. Not yet. I have a hypothesis… but it's too early to tell. I'll have to check.
 Check what?
 …Fine. I can tell you're not lying.
 No. I think you're too old to believe in fairy tales. A skeptic would only get in the way. So I won't even waste time explaining.
 But I do believe you. Now, I do. And I'm coming with you.
 You're way too strict for your age, kids… Perhaps your friend over there has more time. I mean. Your enemy.
 Put your purse away, ripper. We don't trade for money anymore.
 What's that supposed to mean?
 Drag your ears out of your pockets, will you? Coupons! All food is only sold for coupons now. Inquisitorial decree, to crucify profiteers.
 Are you kidding? Where do I get them?
 I have coupons. Show me the goods.
 Go to the Town Hall and ask yourself. I suppose they'll add coupons to the Fund rewards. You doctors are the upper crust now, after all!
 I'd like to eat <i>before</i> I get the Fund reward.
 I suppose I should look around the pharmacy the embalmers operate from. They're bound to jump at an opportunity to work near their base.
 How?
 A hammer, maybe… I bet someone must be taking care of them, boarding the tomb off.
 Each house has a sound of its own. One that has dead people inside can't sound like a normal one.
 Don't mind that. I'll find the place and mark it with a cross for your people to find.
 We need to find an abandoned house. The Dogheads, the snobs, only see things from their ivory tower… My Soul-and-a-Halves know the Town inside and out. Abandoned houses most of all.
 What kind of house?
 The House of Death. Have you heard the story? The candles, the dawn, the locked door?
 No.
 Things like what's happened yesterday and the day before… They never happened. People died, yes, but not like this.\nDeath has come to town. And Death is quite a bird—a homebird, to be precise. So when he comes, he stays in an abandoned house. Even Death needs a place to rest.
 Uh huh.
 Death comes at midnight. That's when trouble starts. But if someone were to find his house before midnight, then either stay there till dawn or light candles inside, he'd be stalled. \nAlso, you're supposed to become immortal… but I don't believe that last part.
 But you believe the rest of it?
 When there's smoke, there's fire. Khan is right about this part, at least. There's a grain of truth in any legend. \nTo hell with old grudges for now. My scouts and I are looking for the House of Death today. We'll start with the Crude Sprawl, I have a hunch it's there. Since your old man… I mean since so many people died there, that's where Death must feel at home.
 You shouldn't go there, kids. The streets are dangerous.
 I'll find the place myself. Let's see if there's any merit to this story.
 I'm not going to cower behind another man! And I want to show Khan the pedagogue how we do things down here. Let them hide in the Tower. We'll do the work.
 I'll find it myself. Stay here.
 That so? Okay, boy, we'll get there together.
 It's your funeral, boy.
 To devour the Town, worms need not kill humans. Earth will consume everyone herself.
 Do you mean to say the <i>plague</i> will consume everyone?
 Time for you to go to Olonngo. The Abattoir.
 Is the path to the blood clear?
 You're back. I can tell you've been inside.
 I'm back, yes.
 Do you know they are one and the same?\nWhat is Earth made of? Rocks, roots, water, worms, plague. Of might that no winter can overcome. Torture it all you want, she'll get her due while she yet lives.
 "While she yet lives," huh?
 
 
 
 
 
 Why are you surprised, yargachin?
 Your sisters… Do they dance with the plague?
 Few words. No throat. Hard to talk.
 What are you?
 I need to check up on one Anna Angel, a circus performer.
 Shekhen
 An abandoned steppe village.
 Stamatin's Loft
 The house of Peter Stamatin, architect and creator of the glass contraption on the other side of the river.
 The Rod
 The mansion of the Saburovs. This part belongs to Katerina, a Dream Mistress. A surreptitious murmur can be heard from these doors sometimes.
 I need to check up on architect Peter Stamatin's health.
 I need to check up on architect Andrey Stamatin's health.
 
 
 …Khan does seem to leave the Tower sometimes. Meaning one can only meet him when he chooses to be available. Noted.
 
 
 Death found himself a home in the Crude Sprawl. It sounds like an urban legend, but where there's smoke, there's fire.
 I don't have time to check every story children tell. I did not look for the House of Death.
 
 I don't know if Death really arrived to our town, or if it was just a bed of infection. What matters is I've found it, and the place will be quarantined. \n\nThe disease will bite off one district fewer now.
 I don't have time to check every story children tell. Let someone else go to the House of Death.
 
 
 A chemist is willing to pay urchins for the service of finding unburied corpses in uninfected houses.
 
 
 The chemist interpreted the Kains' ideas… strangely. He wants to help people understand death, but instead, he simply spreads infection. \n\nIt might be educational to let Victor know how the common people interpret their philosophies.
 
 
 People hide infected corpses at home. I can find such houses by the unhealthy sound—say, on the Bridge Square, close to the zealot's drugstore. When I do, I'll mark the door with a cross.\n\nIf this is left unchecked, infection will spread.
 Victor's people are his responsibility.
 
 
 I've found a house with a suspicious person inside. Is this the right one? I don't think there are corpses here, though…
 
 
 I've marked a suspicious house. Should I keep searching…?
 
 
 I've found the house where corpses were stashed.
 
 
 I marked a house with hidden corpses. Now the spread of infection will be curbed.
 I marked a house incorrectly. This won't help the spread of infection…
 I failed to find a house with unburied corpses. The spread of infection will continue.
 I marked another suspicious house. Just in case.
 
 
 Maria Kaina also marks houses. Healthy ones. \n\nShould I let Victor know? Or trust her reasoning?
 
 
 Let Maria do as she pleases. She's Nina's daughter. Our town has always been ruled by Mistresses.
 Victor will discipline his daughter. There will be no more marks on healthy houses.
 I've found a house with unburied corpses.
 He'll come forward on his own, soon.\nBut that's not important! Forget about revenge. I don't need it.
 You tricked me.
 Hello, my son.
 Who killed you, Father?
 What is important, then?
 Have you been there?
 Yes.
 What did you see?
 Death. Almost everyone is dead. Tycheek, too.
 There are survivors. They worship Tycheek's young daughter.
 Worship?
 She's like… a lucky charm to them. A shield from the plague.
 …So there are survivors. How many?
 Enough that I barely escaped.
 I don't know. By the screams, a hundred. Maybe two.
 
 
 All blood seeps from the Abattoir—perhaps, also, the blood I seek?
 
 
 Here, people drink blood to survive.
 
 
 Here, people dissect the living to understand.
 
 
 Here, people gnaw at each other like animals.
 
 
 Here, beasts live, not people. Life and death are the same to them. The red pit in the ground calls to me.
 
 
 
 His ear waits in the steppe. His heart, here, underground. I finally see. I understand.\n\nThe udurgh is my town.
 I see now what Foreman Oyun wanted to show me. I see everything now. I hope he's still waiting for me in Father's house.
 
 
 …Father deliberately let the plague into the Town.
 
 
 Chemist
 I'm not sharing my formula, if that's what you're after. I don't need competition, thank you very much. Or are you here to put a stop to my little enterprise? Like hell you will! I am the Kains' man. You belong to Olgimsky.
 Because of you, the Town floods with infected corpses.
 So the Kains ordered for corpses to be embalmed?
 I'm my own man.
 People want to protect their loved ones from the flames. Rightfully so. I'm helping them preserve those bodies, as is my duty. Do you think they'd throw the dead into your furnaces if I'm not there? Think again, steppe man.
 You're a criminal.
 Those are not my furnaces. Those are the furnaces of fate.
 The Kains don't need order. They inspire.\nBy their teachings, crossing the great border requires strange but simple steps. They despise death and refuse to play by its rules.\nWho knows? Perhaps preserving the bodies of the dead is the first step toward victory over death. Victor would approve of my work.
 What border?
 So Victor doesn't actually know about this, does he?
 Death is that border, the limit of our existence. Decay limits our capacity to survive as material creatures. Who knows what it takes to defeat death? Ancients believed that the dead might rise as living bodies.
 Are you sure the dead would want to be resurrected?
 You've lost it.
 Victor Kain is shouldering the burden of fighting the epidemic. I'm sure he's well aware of what I'm doing here. The Kains haven't stopped me—meaning they approve. This is the Kain way. To cattle, the greatest achievements seem like transgressions.
 We'll see about that, Kain servant.
 I'll pay him a visit and ask in person.
 Tell your people to stay out of my way, or they'll regret it.
 
 
 
 
 
 Plague, monsters, and wonders are all connected. Kill one, and the rest will suffer, too. Is my goal worth the sacrifice?
 
 
 Father's inheritance was a question, not an answer. He never wanted me to become him—only understand what he understood.\n\nI do, now. And my choice will be mine.
 Commoner
 Muddy Water
 
 How can I help you, doctor?
 What are those sounds?
 House examination. Let me in.
 Everything is in order here. God's mercy.
 So let me in.
 What was that noise?
 What sounds?
 Upstairs. Second floor.
 Are you deaf?
 What for?
 Do I need to kick you?
 I heard odd sounds.
 It's a cat.
 I love cats. Can I come up and pet it?
 Step aside. Now!
 This is neighborly business, doctor. We don't need you here. Get the hint already.
 Fine. I'll send orderlies here, then. Would you rather deal with them?
 I said, move aside! Or else!
 Whatever.
 Concerned One
 They say the Inquisitor got arrested, or they'll catch her soon enough.\nIt's for the best. The army will protect us. I imagine the soldiers will be happy to get her. They've always hated these commissars.
 Why?
 It's not that simple to arrest her. The government gives her free rein.
 Who cares about them here? Authority comes from armed soldiers and a train with cannons. Have you <i>seen</i> those cannons?
 They're hard to miss.
 I haven't. I should take a look.
 They have bad blood from back in the days. Cats and dogs. The inquisition does everything its own way, interfering with the army's plans. They even countermand orders. The generals hate it.
 Small wonder…
 How goes the search for raw materials for your panacea, Burakh? Have you found the bulls? We can no longer wait.
 The aurochs is extinct.
 Why can't we?
 The Army is in town, if you haven't noticed.
 What do they want?
 They have orders to level the Town. Mine are to eliminate the source of the outbreak, while preserving the Town. So their arrival is my death sentence. And I cannot stop them.\nThis brings us back to the subject of the panacea.
 I got no new ideas.
 What should we do, then?
 I got no new ideas.
 …And I was counting on you. Thought you were our best bet. Very well. It's good at least one of us still has their wits about them. I have an idea, thanks to Dankovsky.
 Did he make his vaccine?
 No, but he drew my eye toward that impossible structure. He's in love with it, I think. Particularly with how it stands straight without touching the ground. And is impenetrable to the disease.
 So what?
 Yes. The disease is tied to the Earth.
 Do you know how that Tower was made? Why it exists? The meaning behind its shape?\nThat is all I have been studying recently. And I have found many enlightening facts.
 It was built while I was away. But I know the local kids have set up quarters there.
 The Kains invited some mad architects from the Capital. To challenge the limits of possibility one more time.
 I have no idea what it's made of… They say over two hundred kids and teens live there. How does it stand?
 It was built something like six years ago.
 Precisely. Meaning…?
 I don't know.
 I was told you were seized by the soldiers.
 They wouldn't dare. For now.
 I don't think they ever will.
 Let Bad Grief go, will you? What do you need him for? I can vouch for him.
 Grief came to me of his own volition, and no one is doing anything to him. We have more pressing matters.
 Such as?
 I'll have proof soon. And my intuition has never failed me before. Except for this one time, with you… Still, I do not lose hope. The game isn't over, yet.
 Still, how are they connected?
 I'm flattered. Only that this game of yours is my whole life. Am I free to go?
 Somehow, Burakh. If the impossible suddenly becomes possible, someone must have paid a steep price indeed. The cost of such feats is usually measured in blood.
 Blood… Well, yeah. Blood, blood… I keep searching for it. I know this all has to do with blood.
 If there's blood, there's a panacea. If there's a panacea, I'll have reason to silence the cannons. I'll report that the disease has been cured.\nI'll be saved, too, but that hardly matters… The <i>Town</i> will be saved.
 All right. I'll go, now.
 Just… leave Grief alone, okay? He's a decent man. Better than most.
 I'm happy to see you weren't actually arrested.
 I'm so happy you're still alive! Are you looking for shelter, too? But you can't hide in the Cathedral. Only in the Tower. Or <i>on</i> the Tower, anyway…
 What the hell are you doing here?
 Everyone is gathering in the Tower. Me… I'm mustering up the resolve to follow. It's not easy… I'm very scared of heights.
 Who is gathering in the Tower?
 All the Town's children. Bit by bit… The Tower accepts kids, you know. It will protect us.\nThey're on the stairs now.
 So you all crossed an infected district? You're nuts!
 Why the hell did you abandon your houses?! Why did I even bother to take care of you?
 No grown-ups allowed up there.
 This place is dangerous.
 It's dangerous for you. But not for us.
 My kids are up ahead. Let me through.
 Thousands of parents have asked that, standing right where you're at.\nThe answer is no. No grown-ups allowed. Or it will all fall down.
 If you keep arguing with me, I'll fall down myself. From the disease. Is that what you want?
 What do you mean? Inside? You wouldn't understand. And honestly, neither do we.
 Why are you all here?
 We're scared of the cannon. And we're afraid for the Tower.\nIf they start firing, it could collapse, you know. Or fall. Or rip apart. Basically, it can die.
 It it falls, it won't be because of me. Let me through!
 It is the inquisitor's orders…
 …To come to her immediately, without delay. What a surprise.
 Not now. I have patients! My… my children.
 It's not up for discussion, Burakh. We'll take you there by force, if need be.
 …
 Let's go.
 I'll come on my own.
 Such a charming woman. Really knows how to win people over.
 I'm on my way there anyway. My… wards are there. If they've really spent the night on that staircase.
 Don't ask me how they achieved it. The Polyhedron's foundation pierces many meters into the ground beneath the Town, to its very heart. It's like the barb of an arrow stuck in a wound…\nWhy have you grown pale all of a sudden?
 How… how do you even know about the heart? I only confirmed its existence several hours ago.
 I think you're overworked, sweetheart.
 I know it sounds mad. But the blood of aurochs might be underground. And lots of it.
 I see. Explain. Briefly—but don't omit crucial details. Get to the point.
 A certain kind of bull used to be dissected in the Abattoir. The blood was poured underground for many centuries, as a ritual.
 We have a solution now. A clever one of which I'm particularly proud.\nSo. You may not have saved my life, but you did help me save my professional honor. Intuition never fails me. But I'll need to get proof. Otherwise, they'll refuse to demolish that wretched edifice.
 How do you plan to demolish it? Finding workers in these conditions…
 Odongh
 Odongh
 Herb Bride
 Herb Bride
 Worm
 Odongh
 Kin
 
 
 The Polyhedron defies the law of gravity. But it's still connected to the Earth. Everything is.
 
 
 The Polyhedron is the best possible isolation ward. Sand Pest, which comes from Earth, can't reach it.
 Something's going on with Aglaya.
 Children are gathering atop the Polyhedron.
 
 
 The sand pest defies its own rules. It took all of my wards, and it drags them towards death.
 
 
 To make the panacea, I require an underground river of blood. The Polyhedron's spike wounded Earth like an arrow and clogs the wound. Remove it, and blood will flow. But that which is wounded will die.\n\nA difficult decision awaits me.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 General Block evacuated all of the children. The Town has no future, except for the bunch of kids I'm responsible for.\n\nDid Father foresee this, too?
 
 
 Save my wards at any cost. Antibiotics. Shmowders. Last vials of panacea…\n\nAnything to keep them alive. It'll all be over soon.
 
  
 Sample_Text
 You speak of authority, but it's a yoke. It will enslave me, esegher.
 No. Not yet. Too early.
 Why is that?
 So those were crocodile tears.
 …Are you calling me a crocodile?
 I don't mean your <i>appearance.</i>
 Your teeth look plenty sharp to me.
 Our responsibility is not to the Town, but to the world at large, currently kept safe by your quarantine. And those people won't stay in the Town, they'll scatter. They're not attached to this land.
 You are wrong. They are strongly connected to it.
 Land—Earth—is the one thing they are attached to. Let them go.
 I'll think about it. But I won't believe the Olgimskys' assurances any longer. And who else could give me those? You? What's their word… "emshen"?
 Perhaps it <i>will</i> be me.
 They will not leave this steppe.
 We are happy that you understand.
 I think you should <i>all</i> go to the old village. What's the name… Shekhen? What's holding you here?
 Are we whole again? Yes, we hear it. We are whole again.
 I hope so. Go to Shekhen. Let twyre part before you.
 Did you accept your power over us? Are you our father now?
 Ugh… Aren't you tired of asking?
 I have, by killing those poor souls. You forced my hand.
 It was more interesting when you were different.
 Care isn't about power or violence, you fools. I'll show you one day.
 They need to leave that place. I've already asked the woman from the Capital to unlock the gate. She has the power now. But she refused me, and so will she refuse you.
 So you two have met?
 She didn't refuse me.
 Yes. I've talked to anyone who has power.
 Do you?
 I do. My power comes from the Olgimskys, and from Earth. But those are only scraps.\nThe Kin can be ruled by either force or spirit. Your father did the latter. I do the former. Boös Vlad's strength is behind me.
 They want to see him, by the way. Olgimsky.
 How is that possible? You have no such power. You have no such authority!
 Do you?
 I prefer Father's way, then.
 That's their right. If I were in Olgimsky's place, I'd come. How else will they remember who their master is?\nIf he acts as a master would, with no fear, with no doubt in his power, then they will submit to him again. As animals do.
 You think this will be the end of it?
 Who knows. Whatever happens, Master will get what he deserves. If he's strong enough, he'll restore his power. If not… well, he'll lose it forever. This is his trial. 
 I'll remember your words, Kindred.
 You're smarter than people give you credit for.
 Someone's here. From Olgimsky. They want to talk to you. Don't worry—there's no danger.
 Why would I worry…?
 Olgimsky… I wonder how he found out I was here…
 To hell with it. I don't want to see anyone. Except you, of course.
 You're probably off to a pub now… to drink to your father's memory? The twyrine poison flows wide in The Broken Heart… Stamatin runs a good business… While I allow it…
 A pub? Perhaps. Beats staying here.
 I don't drink. Not now.
 I'll just go wherever legs carry me.
 There's a gleam of goodness in your eyes, my friend. Drink with me.
 There's wickedness in my eyes. 
 I don't drink.
 All right.
 Everyone says twyrine heightens the senses, but I think that's only true of hearing. Vision—no, you won't see anything new. It isn't absinthe. No smells, either. This place reeks of herbs as it is. Hearing, though…
 What about hearing?
 Just drink, and you'll hear how the Town sounds. You'll hear who's calling you, and from where. You'll hear a murmur from afar… Perhaps from across the Gorkhon. Or perhaps from across the Styx itself… \nDrink to my health, friend. This is excellent twyrine.
 There's no such thing as bad twyrine.
 Twyrine's a dangerous liquor. Who knows where it might lure you.
 I can afford this kind of joy.
 So what do you do?
 You don't exactly look rich.
 I was once an architect. Now I'm just a… shadow of an architect.
 Thanks for the drink, friend.
 Likewise. Only I used to be a doctor.
 Twyrine doesn't heighten hearing. It just dampens all the other senses.
 My name is Peter. I am the rock upon which is built the stairway to tomorrow. To the day when man lifts himself from the earth and overcomes its burden. \nI am that rock. And I have already built the first step of that stairway. For I am a true architect.
 And I'm Artemy Burakh. Let's drink to my father's memory. A good man.
 I think you've had enough, Peter.
 Drink, Burakh, drink your twyrine. Listen to the world. Listen to the roar of the terrible earth. Listen to the ringing of the sky. Listen to the Town opening for you. \nYou'll find out where people wait for you. Or whispering about you right now. It's been proven to work.
 I'll check.
 Thank you for the valuable gift. I'll return the favor if I get a chance.
 The rabble is out of control! At least they <i>looked</i> human before. Did you hear about the stabbings? There's people with knives out in the streets now, brother!
 That's impossible. Stabbings don't happen here.
 Yeah… At first I didn't believe my own eyes.
 I mean, I'm quite an artist with the knife, myself… but that's different! Everyone knows I obey no law. \nThese people, there's no wholesome fear left in them. Kniving is taboo around here! That's why I loved this town. But you know the tricks of the trade, don't you? I can tell by your hands.
 I'm a surgeon. It's part of my job.
 It's a family thing.
 I'm no rogue.
 You're a dangerous man. I'm a dangerous man, too. We can reach an understanding if you behave yourself in my establishment.
 Those people with knives… Are they still trying to avenge Burakh?
 Do they think night conceals everything?
 I don't even care. If they come here, they'll regret it. He who lives by the knife, dies by the knife! Such people are outlaws. Killing them incurs no punishment, only gratitude. Judge Kain said so.
 That's fair. Only a butcher has the right to cut flesh.
 Judge Kain… Do you mean old Georgiy? That means it's serious.
 Ah, my fellow traveler! I suspect this is not the last time we chat.
 I recognize you… So you're a merchant?
 I… dabble in buying and selling. But I've no use for coins, though I often find I have two to rub together.\nI collect things. Things that are old, broken, discarded. Dead items. Memories, husks, and husks of memories… "traces," as I call them.
 So you're a rag-and-bone man?
 Shall we play dice?
 Too late. The bones have been cast already.
 You were planning to visit Father, too. Did you find him?
 I did, of course. As soon as I arrived.
 I hope you found him in good health.
 You kidding me? If only!
 What do you sell, fellow traveler? Picking over the Town's bones?
 What do you sell?
 So you were luckier than I was.
 It's good work. When a rag-and-bone man does the rounds, no door stays shut… Who keeps useless junk? Everyone's happy to see me. \nEveryone trusts me. It makes for a peaceful harvest.
 Aren't you afraid of being out at night?
 What use do you have for that junk?
 I just like it when things are tidy. If I don't, people leave things behind, evidence of their passage… a mess. Won't do. Better to take those things into my bag.
 An unpleasant occupation.
 All right, let's see what you barter for.
 I <i>only</i> work nights. It's a ripe time. \nDoes it frighten me? No. Nor should it frighten you. The Town changes each night, turns into a different place to explore. What was open during the day closes… and what was closed, opens.
 I have no fear. Only insomnia.
 Good luck with that…
 Happy to make your acquaintance. You'll get a lot of… "traces" from me, I'm sure.
 Done that already.
 Three poisoned patients are in a warehouse we used to play in when we were kids. They seem to require medical help.
 
 Time moves forward while I sleep. This way, I may skip some events. \n\nOn the other hand, if I have nothing to do, sleeping is a good way to move things forward.
 The clinking of dice can be heard here.
 I can sleep at Lara's until evening, if I want to. Or I could wander the Town.
 I'm done with everything important for today. I'm free to rest until tomorrow... or explore the town. At night, its face changes.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 
 I can drink to Father's memory in the Broken Heart.
 I can gather my strength in The Broken Heart.
 I can drink to Father's memory in the Broken Heart.
 
 No one would condemn me for killing bandits at night. I might even be rewarded. Hm…
 No one would condemn me for killing bandits at night. I might even be rewarded. Hm…
 What a twist. I robbed the Soul-and-a-Halves of their revenge… but somehow they're thankful for this.
 Twyrine uncovers that which is hidden. Every sip will reveal a secret event or location to me.
 What play is it?
 I'm not a theatregoer. Never understood the appeal.
 It's about death. Hot on its trail, so to speak.\nI've already tried to stage this study once, but it didn't work out. The acting was bad. No one understood what they were playing. How can you be a Kain, a Burakh, or Sinister Katerina if you don't walk their paths? No one grasped their character.\nThis time it will be different.
 What do you mean?
 They used to act out old steppe rites here when I was a kid…
 I want full authenticity. I will move the play outside, into the streets.\nActors play out real events while being in the middle of them. The audience doesn't know they're in a play. The actors, that they're being watched. Such is my method…
 We have a ton of steppe theatre costumes in the storeroom. Especially those wicked birds, Muu Shubuun. The ones that symbolize death. Do steppe people like the play with death?
 Not really. They just have a different attitude toward it.
 Muu Shubuun is not a mask of death. It's actually more about life.
 Conversations like this make my head hurt.
 Every night, an odd performance is held in the Theatre.
 ???
 
 This potion was made from infected flesh. I've added several active components to a bacterial culture, and hopefully got a medicine capable of suppressing the microbe. It's time to put the theory to test.
 You're quite the sleeper, human.
 …I shouldn't have gone to bed at all.
 I need to rest.
 Exactly. You'll sleep your whole life away, if you're not careful. "Time and tide tarry for no man," remember? Quality proverb.
 This isn't life.
 Life is a dream.
 While you dream, the Town lives. Someone out there waits for you, this very moment. Perhaps they wait in vain. Is my hint clear? Don't be surprised if you wake up and find every train has left the Station.
 I'm not easily shaken, little critter. See, here I am, talking to you like all this is normal.
 No one waits for me, not here.
 The infected districts are off limits to anyone but medical personnel. Doctor Dankovsky's orders… Are you that Vorakh guy?
 Burakh. He sure has memory issues, doesn't he?
 Oh, this place is infected? I'll be on my way, then.
 Immune boosters, two pills. Protective clothes, one unit. Here you go. And God save you.
 Pills… Well, I guess it's better than nothing.
 Clothes? Does that fop think fleas transmit the disease? It's not a plague! I suppose, though, you can't be too careful…
 So, does it work now?
 The alembic? It does.
 What about the big one?
 I'll fix it, too.
 Would you like me to look for scrap metal? What do you need to fix it? Cogs and stuff?
 I'll need a special toolkit for it.
 Only one of them.
 I don't know yet.
 I'll find the components myself.
 What is this girl doing here?
 How should I know?
 This is Grace. She's the cemetery caretaker.
 Forget it. Do you have any immunity boosters?
 I do.
 I don't.
 Where's that… artist?
 He's an architect, and I have no idea. I came here for him, not the girl…
 Damn it! Why do they keep going outside? Do they want to get infected?
 She needs medicine. In an infected district, everyone's in danger. Immunity boosters can help.
 I know. I'll take care of her.
 What do you want? Don't touch me! Stay away!
 I'm not touching you.
 Quiet now… I'm a doctor.
 I should have left this god-forsaken place two years ago. Get clean and move away for good. But I have no spine. I'm not a real man. Cannot leave her behind.
 Leave whom behind?
 The Judge wanted me to check on you.
 If you're here, then so is he. Good. I'll tell the others. There's only four of us here; we'll need to call for help.
 What are you doing here?
 You should leave, Khatanghe. No good will come of you being here.
 He's not here.
 You're a bad liar, Khatangher. It is unbecoming. We will not lie to you. We will call for help.
 That leaves me no choice. I'll have to use lethal force.
 It's good to know there are only four of you. And all separated, too.
 I wait. Taste the air. We plan on leaving already. Thought we were mistaken. But he <i>is</i> here, after all. Your presence confirms it.
 I confirm nothing.
 He's not here. I'm looking for him, just like you.
 He's in the Termitary.
 That Stakh Rubin, akhar, your father's false student. You know him. Tell me what he does at night.
 I can tell you what ho doesn't do: sleep. As far as I can tell.
 I barely know him.
 "False"? He was a very loyal student. Went overboard even.
 Tell me, what does he do during the night? Where does he hide?
 Why do you care?
 Ask him yourself. During the day, he's in the hospital, working.
 Good question...
 He has no respect for the dead. No respect for the body. He cuts bodies open without grace. He knows not the Lines.\nHe's an outsider.
 Precisely. Outsiders have no obligation to honor our traditions.
 For what it's worth, I'm an outsider too.
 The khatanghe are worried. Your friend is doing evil. The blame, as always, will be pinned to us. And we are dwindling by the hour as it is. Mere hundreds left now.
 Unente... don't tell me. I know.
 I think... Actually, disregard that. I don't think anything.
 I'll take care of him. He's my friend, after all. Not yours.
 He won't say. And we don't have time.\nHe needs to be stopped. Fast. Very fast.
 Why?
 You're right. Otherwise he might die from exhaustion.
 I'm curious now. What <i>does</i> he do at night...?
 
 
 Father's contraption is out of order. I'll need a chunk of metal scrap and a good spring to fix it.
 
 
 The second contraption needs serious repair. It requires a toolkit. \n\nI haven't seen one around these days. I'll look for it later.
 
 
 
 
 Came here to have some fun, sawbones? Plague is a time for feasts.
 So, I hear you're an architect?
 
 
 Complex mixtures are brewed in the big alembic, but it's broken. It requires a toolkit to fix.\n\nTime to deal with this issue.
 
 
 I've fixed the big alembic. Now I can brew more complex medicine.
 
 
 By mixing water and herbs, I can make an immunity booster. Unsurprisingly, it boosts immunity. \n\nSurprisingly, it also reveals symptoms of diseases.
 
 
 Immunity protects one's health in infected districts. I should keep it high. Protective clothes also help.
 
 
 
 
 
 Immunity protects health is infected districts. As do clothes.
 
 
 Immunity protects health in infected districts. As do clothes.
 
 
 
 
 
 If I give an immunity booster to an inhabitant of an infected district, they have a higher chance to avoid infection.\n\n<b>I can't guarantee anyone full protection.</b> But I can rig this in my favor.
 Peter Stamatin isn't home, but I should still check if everything's all right here.
 Blood-Kin
 This is our blөөd, tangher. Little of it left here, inside. Six springs. Six gulps. We will not allow үүou to drink our blөөd.
 I'm getting exhausted.
 Bite kharaan, it is so. Yes. For you are not like us.
 I'm human.
 But we are beasts. We are Worms. Do you know that we are Worms within Earth?
 Whose blood is it, Khatangher?
 It's Mother Boddho's blөөd. She feeds us with her breast. Listen.\nCan үүou hear the pulse? This is the pulse of her veins, akhar.
 You're an akhar! To you, I'm an emshen.
 Give me a sip.
 
 
 
 Go ahead. Tie it together.
 Tie what together?
 You ask me? The ones that fit together. A menkhu sees the connections between.
 It doesn't take exceptional wisdom to see connections.
 Blood-Kin
 
 
 You are too quick, kind sir! You pace ahead of schedule like a man possessed. Let's see: The next event of consequence is set to come into your life… Tonight. Later.
 So what now? I guess I could get some sleep?
 How can you tell which events are of consequence?
 Thanks for the warning, pal.
 Why sleep? So much to do! So little time! \nIf you can find an hour or two to spare, then make the most you can of precious time. For bitter Fate demands that you prepare: Explore the town and fill your pockets, quick! Your time is short, and no one knows what tide tomorrow brings.
 Oh, I know. An ill tide.
 Fair advice.
 I was a fortune-teller's own assistant. Though some thought him a fraud, I saw behind the curtain, awed at all I witnessed there.\nSo trust me when I say: There's time enough for you, Burakh. For now, at least, there's time.
 So do I just sit around and nap until evening?
 I am happy I got to meet you, Burakh. You are a very special person.
 I'm not, not really.
 Why have we stopped?
 Stay here. I'll go out and check.
 You are wrong. We belong to different worlds.
 Move aside.
 What do you want?
 There are no infected people among us. You're free to go, doctor. Return to the Town.
 What for…?
 I think… all these plague days have been leading to me doing something like this.\nI've been accused of all sorts of crimes—but I was innocent. There were rumors that I was a looter, that I walked around with a revolver killing people. I guess… I had to prove them right.
 Did <i>you</i> do it?
 That was a sobering experience. Don't you think so?
 I guess.
 Take pity on us, essegher. Kill not our mother.
 …I need only <i>technically</i> execute the order. All I need is a precise target designated by the state commissar. If I have that, I can legally spare the Town.\nThank this girl. She promised me the epidemic wouldn't spread past the Town. And I believe her.
 You mean… her? The Changeling?
 ???
 Burakh's Tagloor
 
 
 You brought him. Good. Now you will become responsible for us. \nFat Vlad was a bad master. You'll be better. You'll care for us with your life, listen to Boddho's will, listen to Suok's chant, do what we will.
 Power is a curse. Find someone else to rule you. Like Oyun.
 Fine. I will become your father. I will take care of my people. I promise.
 Be khara, these are the right words. You truly do know the Lines, emshen.
 I kept my word. I brought you Olgimsky. Now let the girl go.
 Didn't we tell you she can't be cut away from us?\nDo you fear for her? We'll take her with us to Shekhen as soon as we can. Neither the Town nor the sand pest can touch us there.
 Then go. The Olgimskys have no power over you anymore.
 Why are you still here, then? I'll speak to the inquisitor on your behalf. I'll let her know you're only going to Shekhen, not further.
 Some of us reject your authority. They hate you. They blame you, your father, for everything. They'll never accept you. \nWe can't leave this place torn asunder. Kill them, so that we may be whole again.
 Kill? Aren't you all one body?
 I'm not killing anyone.
 I don't want to carry you. Wouldn't a good father leave it to you?
 Do as you will. We don't care. We can't leave this place split. We can't start a new life torn apart.
 So where are the crazed ones?
 We will lock ourselves in our rooms now, preparing. The disloyal ones will keep wandering about, skulking in the shadows with their plots.\nWe'll open the doors again when the schism is no more. And then we'll go to Shekhen.
 I see.
 Blackmail…
 Numerous, they are. We have no weapons. But you know the Lines.
 Lines make for a lousy weapon.
 Where are those apostates of yours?
 You've got the wrong man. The other Olgimsky is to blame. This man only came to protect him.
 I rise. No one can stop me now. And you can do nothing against me. I am taking them all.
 Who?
 All in your care. All you care for.\nThey wish it, you know. Worry not. Children have better odds than grown men. Much better.
 Why?
 I come to teach the folk how to overcome death. And children are the most striking of your kind. They can do more than their mothers and fathers.
 You're not omnipotent. I have a weapon against you.
 You have no weapon. You mean your "panacea," all-heal, yes? What good is such a draught in a world bereft of the stuff to craft it? Wonders flee this world, Burakh. I am one of dwindling few. You fail to ken it yet.
 They do. They're leaking out. But I know what that flow comes from, now.
 I have heard such before.
 Even children managed to make a cure for you. Five years ago. "Schmowders…"
 Indeed? You are welcome to seek them out. But I reckon you will find no children in the streets these days.\nKnow you the newest tidings, man of fog? Lend me an ear, then, to what I tell you!
 I will save some. At least that. To prove you're not all-powerful.
 A doctor's victory isn't about saving everyone, but about creating a cure. Which I have.
 Everyone on my list will survive. I remember my duty.
 Isidor Burakh
 Zurkhen's Small Chamber
 What matters is that you understood something.
 But did I understand what was most important?
 
 
 Oyun must know about the Termitary.
 
 
 Oyun is a shepherd of bulls. He is convinced the Kin can only be dragged to salvation by force.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 There is a schism in the Kin. Apostates run rampant in the Termitary. To restore the Kin, the gangrene must be cut off. Or can I heal it?
 
 
 The apostates have been pacified. Time to speak with the Kin.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Messenger
 Are you sad that I went off to the friend of mine? Don't be! It all happened for a reason. I died so that I could tell you three things. I think you need to know them.
 What three things?
 Have you... died?
 I'm so sorry, kid.
 This place is very sad, but not too scary. Lonely, though. But that's fine, I guess. I used to be sad and lonely in life too. So it's not that big a change.
 You sound more adult.
 I miss you so much.
 Forgive me...
 Listen to me, please. This is important. What if someone wakes you up now and we never meet again?
 I'm listening.
 Item one. The sand pest is closely connected to the earth. So it's actually dangerous to touch her. And if she's cured, you might actually hurt the earth.
 Got it. Next one?
 Item two. Everyone thinks it's a calamity, like a hurricane or an earthquake. That we're just unlucky. But it happened for a reason. The outbreak has a cause. Someone unleashed her on purpose.
 Who would do that?
 Was it a human?
 What was the reason?
 I don't know. She won't tell. My friend doesn't talk to me much anymore now... and doesn't know anything... I thought she would be more interesting. Will you listen to item three?
 Of course. Go on.
 Item three is this. Everyone thinks she kills whoever she touches. Hah! She'd love that! But in truth, some people don't succumb to her. That makes her teeth-grindingly angry!
 Who doesn't succumb to it?
 What does it depend on?
 So it is evil after all?
 I don't know... it's for you to find out.
 How?
 Can I fix all this?
 Could I have saved you?
 What did you think? Of course she is.
 What am I supposed to do now, Murky?
 I could have prevented this, couldn't I?
 Just... connect to people more. If you talked to me more often, I wouldn't be here. \nYour touch is different from hers. Yours are nice. You're a doctor, after all. You know how to connect what is broken.
 Will I dream of you again?
 I don't know... Come on, turn that frown upside down! Just pay more attention to the people in your care. Especially Sticky. He's very devoted to you.
 It's I who should be comforting you...
 Forgive me.
 I'll try.
 Мятежник
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Father was killed by Foreman Oyun.
 
 
 
 Oyun is here.
 
 
 Let Oyun live. I looked him in the eye and forgave him, but he will never forgive himself. Now his life is emptiness and torment.
 Oyun got his just deserts. All is fair. All is as it should be.\n\nAny choice is right, as long as it's willed.
 Soldier
 Soldier
 Which side are you on?
 Ours.
 I didn't bother with the issues of children.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Bad Grief is no longer waiting for me.
 I did not look for Rubin.
 The Town Hall is no longer looking for me.
 Бунтовщик
 Name?
 Artemy Burakh, doctor. Where's General Block?
 The general is sick. The provisional executive officer is Captain Longin.
 I'm a doctor. Let me examine the general.
 General Block is out sick. Captain Longin is now in charge of the quarantine measures. You can try your luck with him when he's back.
 How did he manage to catch it, I wonder? He was here, in the headquarters! There was no plague around here yesterday. And it needs at least a day before it shows…
 Filling. Soldiers take these to the front so that their death comes from a bullet rather than starvation.
 General Block never wanted to come to this town, but it's a soldier's duty to follow orders… Isn't it?
 Satisfies a little hunger, but is it worth the risk?
 Rotten Food
 Meat? Bread? Vegetables? Can't tell. Plague makes everyone—and everything—equal.
 Candy Wrapper
 A colorful piece of paper. Useless.
 A blurry blue spot in the corner could either be an official seal, or a trace of dissolved candy.
 Quenches a little thirst, but is it worth the risk? I can't craft tinctures with it.
 Why did I collect this?
 Button
 A trifle to a human, but a whole eye to a doll.
 Murky is said to have a doll, but no one's ever seen it. Perhaps it simply lives all over the Town?
 Cotton Wool
 Looks like stuffing of some sort.
 In the wide world, a surgeon's best friend, but back here, people take surgery less seriously, and disinfectant is mostly taken by mouth.
 An herbal infusion. Drink to reveal events and places hidden from the naked eye.
 The Town calls to me. But it's hard to hear over my own thoughts. If I quiet them down, I can sense the pulse of life all over the Town.
 Aglaya needs to have a serious talk with me.
 
 
 
 
 
 Aglaya's mission is complete. She's doomed to die here. But she only wants to flee this hell if it's with me.\n\nI accepted. We'll meet tonight at the Station.
 Aglaya's mission is complete. She suggested we flee.\n\nAbsurd. I have children. I have the Town. I'm not going anywhere.
 sdfsdf\n\ndf\nwer\n
 Well, mine was just murdered! My brother's, too! Murdered in cold blood!\nThat Tower was alive! Alive! And there won't ever be another one like it! Ever! Even Brother won't make one! Even I won't build one on this sorry earth! Do you understand? Do you?!
 I do! Stop yelling at me.
 I just want someone to pick me up and hold me.
 I thought you hated being touched.
 
 
 
 
 Ukhedel… Earth is cold… My feet are cold… I'm going deaf, blind. My hands are rough. Boleesh, boleesh, byy alysh…
 What's wrong with you, khetey?
 And not just mine. Back in Thanatica, we fought for life. For the right to live. For a chance to… to never let death <i>veto</i> people. That's what we were robbed of.\nThis tower… Ah, what is there to say. It's gone. And so is hope.
 I understand it's hard for you.
 Ne'er been up here. Can you imagine?
 What do you plan to do now?
 No, my boy… Life's not over yet. Not over. It only looks broken… but we will start anew. We will rebuild it…
 The same as before?
 People always say it was Andrey and Peter who built this town, but that's not true. The Oneirotects did. And Nina and Victoria too, in their own way…\nAnd then there was Farkhad, another Oneirotect. He built the Cathedral.
 Many generations worked on this town before all the Andreys, Peters, and Farkhads came along.
 
 
 
 [a living heart of a giant creature]
 The Eighth.
 [it's beating… barely]
 Talk to me.
 …To me. [I've been talking to you this whole time.]
 You're the udurgh.
 …Udurgh. [I don't know this word.]
 You are the Town's heart, yes?
 You are the voice of Earth. No?
 Are Earth and the Town one and the same? Do you know?
 …No.
 Am I talking to myself again? I tend to do that. Yes…
 …Yes.
 The Town is alive.
 …Alive.
 You're just an echo.
 No. You're not just an echo.
 I feared this town might be a cradle. But it ended up being a catapult bucket.
 Is it time to take off?
 I suspect I'm the only person here who has figured out that you were the one who did it. A simple calculation, Burakh. Numbers never lie. And you know what? I can get behind what you've done. It was a fifty-fifty chance.\nTruthfully? I find it oddly inspiring. I'm no writer, but I'll write about you.
 Not a poem, I hope?
 Mother would have approved of my ideas. She loved people. I don't. But I do believe that, when treated with respect, they return it in spades.\nEconomic growth is based on human dignity. And "dignity" is a word that we haven't heard too often around these parts.
 Can you tell me more about your mother?
 I'm really very grateful to you, Artemy, for what you've done. You did everything right, guiding this town toward the future. I'll always be glad to return the favor however I can.
 You speak so politely… like we're strangers.
 My husband is no longer governor…
 I'm sorry for your loss.
 Oh. I was just wondering if you'd come.
 Well, here I am.
 Twenty-four… Thirty-three… Seven… Seven-and-five…
 How's it going, cub?
 …So beautiful.\nSometimes, stone seems useless. Anything is better than stone. Wax, silk, glass… Stone is for the tone-deaf. But occasionally, it shines—even in this crude configuration…
 Yes. Nina was very beautiful.
 Is this our new house?
 I guess. Do you like it?
 You know, old boy, I was never persecuted for my genius. Nor was I prosecuted for murder. And yet, it turns out <i>all this</i> was my hell after all.
 What do you mean?
 Waiting for your command, my Mentor.
 Joking? Good. Keep it up.
 Katerina is no longer a Mistress.
 I'm sorry for your loss.
 Medenegshe, I hereby grant you new law. \nOver your left hand it is done, not the right. So speaks Mother Boddho… Unsure <i>why</i> she speaks so, but still. We will tell hands apart, now. Tiimel daa.
 Preaching already, girl?
 Let us be quiet for a while.
 Sure.
 In the end, I'm glad it turned out this way. The Tower was a thorn in the side.
 Right on.
 So what's the plan now?
 What's left to do?
 
 
 …Farewell.
 
 
 Aglaya Lilich sent couriers with the orders to demolish the Polyhedron to Headquarters. Did they get there? I should check.
 Aglaya has ordered the Polyhedron to be demolished. The couriers with her orders will reach their headquarters in the morning.\n\nShould I make sure that they get there safely? Or that they don't…?
 
 
 
 The army leaves at 22:00. If they have the Inquisitor's orders, they'll make the shot. Otherwise, they'll likely just leave.
 
 
 The couriers are looking for General Block. He could be in any of the remaining zones of conflict.
 
 
 One courier died in a shootout.\n\nDemolish the Polyhedron. Spill rivers of blood. Make enough panacea for everyone. This is the only way to grant the Town a future.
 Anyone can be understood. Anyone can be forgiven. Even oneself…
 There's blood on your hands.
 
 
 One of the couriers was killed by Dankovsky. To save the Polyhedron. His reasons are his own. He doesn't know how the world works.\n\nBut… maybe the Polyhedron should survive? Maybe it deserves to?
 I've found a courier! But I need to cure him first… or rid of the thugs guarding him.
 
 
 One courier is still out there, bleeding.\n\nIf the papers reach General Block, Living Earth will die forever—along with all its wonders.
 
 
 The last courier is out in the Town. Where?\n\nAll this time, the Town whispered directions to me. But now it's silent. For the first time, I'll have to think for myself.
 The Army is leaving. I hold the last copy of the Inquisitor's papers. Will there be a bombardment? I have to decide before 22:00.
 
 
 If I bring the papers to the Headquarters, there will be a bombardment. The Polyhedron will be demolished. Rivers of blood will spill—enough to make the panacea for everyone.
 
 
 If I burn the papers, or at least hide them till 22:00, the soldiers will leave without firing. The living won't die. Earth's wonders will survive.
 
 
 The choice has been made.
 The udurgh is the Living Earth. I choose her. Ancient aurochs return from the depths of time.
 The udurgh is living people. I choose them. The sand pest will be eradicated forever.
 
 
 The Polyhedron is about to be shot down.
 
 
 The Polyhedron is no more. Blood seeps from the ground. All that's left is taking as much as I can.
 Listen! What have you <i>done?</i> How could this happen? You lied to me, didn't you? And not just me, to all of us!
 What did I do that's so wrong?
 Coda
 
 
 The rest is silence.
 The Town is mine to explore. Always has been. I'll touch it one last time and then return to where it all began.
 What do you want?
 Keep standing guard, I've got nothing.
 Don't fret, I've got a paper from Saburov.
 Got your hands on a permit, huh? Go on in then, it's your funeral.
 Don't worry, I've seen worse.
 I'm not scared of a little dirt.
 Is this your money, sir? I think you dropped your purse.
 I've no use for money. Not like it buys anything here.
 …Of course it is. Thank you so much for giving it back.
 Is this some kind of test of character?
 Alas, today is not the day for commerce. Suspicious folk from out of town are outlawed. But there's a shop that deals in stolen loot, stood among the Warehouses, trading with all sorts and no regard for reputation.\nSo you may find a use for money yet.
 You think so?
 Should you restore your reputation, sir, would you then wish to seek its ruin anew with theft and robbery? No! Of course you wouldn't.\nBut trust in trade; for coins cannot recall from whence they came.
 Indeed, they are a man's best friend…
 Save money, sir. You'll need it yet.
 An optimist, I see.
 You sure about that?
 Ah, just the kind of place I'm looking for.
 I prefer to barter for what I need.
 Thanks, man in black.
 I don't know what to do with it, given the circumstances.
 Human.
 Rat.
 Is that a mask you're wearing?
 ...What are you?
 No.
 What are you then?
 Someone, pinch me.
 A thing of the dark. A thing of the depth. Flesh of earth's warm flesh. I know answers. You don't even ask questions. What are you looking for here, in the depths?
 Happiness, I guess... Same as everyone.
 Truth.
 We're not that deep.
 You won't die of sand pest. It's not a threat to you, and thus not your main concern.
 No threat?
 Wrong. Time buries you, deeper and deeper with each minute. You're deep enough in my soil that I can give you advice now.
 Since when is soil yours? It's mine.
 Like how to get out of this cesspool, I hope?
 What is, then?
 It came after the people who want too much and do too little. You have it the other way round.
 Really?
 Flattering.
 Sand pest will kill everyone for real, but not you. But there is someone in the town who can truly destroy you. Ignorance is a worse threat to you than a strange disease.
 What <i>will</i> kill me then?
 I won't tell. You'll figure it out. Else it makes no sense. And you wouldn't believe me anyway.
 I don't believe you as it is.
 I'm not that special.
 That's what I thought... old bullshit. "Everything happens for a reason", "you'll figure it out when the time comes"... bleh.
 Farewell, thing. You gave me food for thought.
 Why are you in a rush? Whom did you expect to find here, in the Town Hall? The Committee for the Prevention of the Outbreak? The rulers?\nNow I, the Sand Plague, also known as the Sand Pest, flesh of the earth's flesh, will rule this town.
 There was an alarm bell.
 As a truly progressive leader, I shall instill a new order among you. Heed this. The laws will be few, for you don't have much longer to live.
 I'm all ears.
 Yeah, I was expecting to find people. So I'm the first to get here? Good.
 Thresholds are not to be crossed. They who cross one are doomed. Wherever I catch you, stay put. Don't move. \nIf I got you inside, you stay there. If I got you outside, stay there. Thresholds are not for you now.
 Next.
 No, you heed this: I'm a doctor, you're a disease. The laws shall be mine.
 I guess I'm hallucinating from exhaustion... I need to get some sleep.
 You are not to deliberate, doubt, and toss about. You are not to think. They who abandon their attachments, feelings, and individual thought, who drop their self and name, who turn into worthless grass, will be allowed to live slightly longer.
 I'm writing this down.
 I forbid you to kill children. Let them be the most resilient of us all.
 Enough. I'm leaving.
 I forbid you to touch the Kin. Leave my people alone. It's dwindling as it is.
 Bite your tongue. Enough of this.
 You are all to have same faces, same thoughts, and same actions. A swarm, a hive, a flock. No more changing faces or names. Only I get to do this now. \nYou may trade clothes, food, things, and promises, if you like. But your selves are forfeit now. <i>I</i> will change you.
 These are hints on how to destroy you, aren't they?
 You're not entirely honest, pest. I'm good at detecting lies. But I will find a way to get under your skin and learn the truth.
 Do not cast shadows. Do not fulfill promises. Do not create new items. Do not connect the unconnectable.\nI hereby grant each doctor nine days to give up and leave this place for good.
 Nine days are more than enough.
 I give you <i>three</i> days to scram. Then I'll defeat you.
 Wait! Saying is doing, right? Let's stop talking then.
 Anyone I touch will die. No one can survive on their own. No one can help. Seal your eyes with dirt and return to the soil from whence you came, and crawl there. Only the silent and the patient will survive me.
 You have no power over me.
 I accept your laws. But you'll regret this.
 Fair enough. See you around.
 One can buy things in this shop no matter their reputation.
 Rat Prophet
 ???
 Off-Hour Prompter
 General Block is once again in control of the troops. No Longin's people here. This will not be discussed. We leave at ten. This will not be discussed either.\nSo what do you want?
 Has a courier been here? Carrying papers?
 
 
 You're a coward, akhar. You didn't confess immediately.
 Artemy Burakh
 Gang Leader
 Boddho's Murmur
 Andrey Stamatin
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Day One,\nin which the Haruspex finds out his hometown has changed beyond recognition.
 Day Two,\nin which the Haruspex's roots are unearthed.
 Day Three,\nin which the alarm bell tolls.
 Some opportunities have been irreversibly missed. But sleep is not the only option—certain events will unfold at night.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nDeath toll over the past 24 hours: 7 people.\nGone missing: 3 people.
 THE DAY IS OVER
 THE DAY IS OVER
 You should think it all over once more.
 Think what over?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pass
 This paper should be enough for guards to let me near my own house.
 A pass, signed and stamped by Saburov.
 Alexander Block
 Lieutenant
 Yes?
 Are you planning the barrage? If so, where are you aiming?
 Loyalist
 
 I'll figure it out.
 I hate overconfident, bullheaded people!
 Changeling
 Town's Reflection
 Rat Prophet
 Peter Stamatin
 Anna Angel
 Yulia Lyuricheva
 Khan
 Caspar's Reflection
 Kindred One
 Patches
 Katerina Saburova
 Clara
 Uta
 Stump
 Odongh
 Herb Bride
 Tangher
 Measly
 Thrush
 Messenger
 Kindred
 Messenger
 Suspect
 Khetey
 Fellow Traveller
 Executor
 Some opportunities have been irreversibly missed; others can still be seized. Several events will unfold this night, and become unavailable by dawn.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nDeath toll over the past 24 hours: 13 people.\nGone missing: 7 people.\n\n
 Boatman
 For a "fingernail", can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking.
 For a "fingernail", can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking.
 Boatman
 Can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking. Costs two "fingernails" now.
 Can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking. Costs two "fingernails" now.
 Boatman
 Messenger
 Oyun summons you.\nHe said: "If tangher Burakh doesn't come, tell him I'm not long for this world. If I die, so will the answers he seeks."\nDid my words reach you?
 Yes.
 
 Want to ask?
 Where did you come from?
 I have the proof I need to demolish that tower of death. This is a goodbye, then, Artemy Burakh. \nOver these last few days, you have truly become… significant, to me. Perhaps the one person I care about.
 The children seem to think it's a tower of life.
 Children also throw bullets into fires and believe in the tooth fairy.
 You seem to hold a personal grudge against that building.
 Yes. Demolishing it is my life's work.\nI can say it safely, now. Because I am not long for this world.
 Why are you so desperate?
 Today I will be killed.
 By whom?
 How do you know?
 Call it a hunch.
 What for?
 The military would never miss a shot at an inquisitor. We always hinder their advances. They pay us back in kind.\nI know they have the order. They must. This isn't my first year on the job.
 You need to flee, then.
 I have thought about it. Send a courier in my place… or better yet, three. But no. That would be cowardice.
 Do send them! Three should be enough.
 Give me the papers. I'll take them to the Town Hall.
 And you'll get arrested immediately. Can you afford that?
 No.
 You've made your choice, then.\nYou are right. Fleeing would be a coward's choice. You cannot afford it, so neither can I.
 So be it, then.
 You know what? To hell with it. Let's run off together.
 Good… Yes. It's the right thing to do. Right.\nA train will wait for us by the Passenger Station at two in the morning. I will meet you there.
 See you.
 Right.
 So are you.
 No. You're a full-fledged human being.\nWe are taught that humans are processes. Nearly half will halt this process at a very early stage. Another half will even regress after growing up, shedding what little progress they made in childhood.
 It's hard to grow.
 I'm a brute, and not a clever one at that.
 You can trust me on this, Burakh.\nI'd say you'd make a fine inquisitor, but… no. You wouldn't, actually. Your tools are different. You don't use our mode of analysis, but you still see the big picture. Connecting the dots is the foundation of our work.
 Very well. I'll take your word for it.
 Tell me about your work.
 It is a story too long to be told short.\nYou build out a map of facts, and conclusions, then snap a picture of them. Keeping in mind that facts, too, are processes; they change over time. Then you tease out connections from one to the other…
 Yes. The Lines.
 Sounds… familiar.
 Perhaps a great bull, Bos Turokh, came to bid us farewell. They do that. I had a dream where one derailed my train… An eternity ago, now.
 Tell me what's waiting for me there.
 Yes. That, too.
 I don't care about the Kin. I just want to make a sort of medicine, Kindred. A serum, a panacea…
 Is this some kind of trial?
 What does that word mean to you?
 An empty, ancient, mindless rite.
 It doesn't matter what you want. What matters is what you're made for.\nThe Abattoir is where you'll see if this is your destiny. If you're ready for it. If you want to take care of what remains of the Kin, or not.
 I've made up my mind already.
 That's not enough.
 But I don't want to go.
 A way to test your fate.
 What does it mean to <i>you?</i>
 There, inside, you'll understand why your father did the deed for which he was killed. I think you will.
 What deed?
 All right. I'm going.
 Do you know who killed him?
 He tore apart old connections.
 Connections between what?
 All answers lie in Olonngo, Kindred. If you return alive but still confused, I'll try to explain it… if I'm not dead by then.
 Is the Abattoir open for me now?
 The Gates of Labor, through which workers pass, are locked. So are the Gates of Sorrow, from which carcasses leave. For now. \nThe Bulljaw, through which bulls pass, is open now. It will accept you.
 Are they expecting new bulls from the steppe?
 One.
 Fine. I'll go inside.
 All right.
 He must have had his reasons. He knew the Lines.
 I'll make new ones.
 My advice: Olonngo means "Ford." We come inside light and gutted.\nBetter not to take anything with you. What you cling to will fall from your hands there.\nDon't be scared of that. If you mount the Ford, they will return. And you will understand.
 Fine.
 I'm heavy. That's not a burden I can drop.
 I think I'll keep my clothes, at least.
 By my eyes?
 What, do I look older now?
 What did you see there?
 The guts of our people.
 I refuse to rule the Kin. I don't want anything to do with them.
 I saw… strange things.
 Yes, Khatangher. We are beasts. We crave a strong hand.\nYou understand now that you must take power over them. Take an udhey and herd them like cattle.
 That's not what Father used to say.
 Your father's path brought us no happiness. They don't need to be turned into people. Animals demand a different sort of care.\nDon't you see, akhar? This cursed plague is no threat to us while we remain beasts. Mother Boddho's blessings fall on simplicity. Earth doesn't brook those who walk too straight.
 Father did everything right.
 What does that have to do with the infection? It's not like we're immortal. We'll still die like cattle—just a bit later, perhaps.
 Your father let the sand plague into the town. He let everything you now see around you happen—deliberately.
 You're lying. Father stopped it five years ago. As he would now, if he hadn't died.
 I don't believe you.
 …I knew it.
 Five years ago, he failed to understand the sand pest's nature. He had no time to think. He was a man of action—just like you, akhar.\nFor years, he contemplated the outbreak. I think those thoughts drove him mad. When it returned, he opened the door. Eagerly.
 Why would he do that?
 I'm too simple to understand his complex reasons. He believed the sand pest would turn subhumans into humans. Creatures-who-have-not-lived into living creatures.\nHe said: "A town like ours must endure it to live and mature. It's called a vaccination."
 What else did he say?
 That you would come and finish what he started.
 No. I don't believe it. You must be confused. You couldn't understand his designs.
 Wait… I need some time to think it all over.
 You're not simple, Kindred. You're stupid.
 Whether you die or kill, you touch death. What matters is what you understand in that crucial moment.\nIf you understand too little, you won't survive this fleeting touch. Whether you die or kill, you still won't.\nThat's what the elders say.
 What else do they say?
 I have no attachment to this life. I wanted you to understand. If you rushed and killed me too early, you would regret it later.
 I don't think so.
 Speak.
 That everyone should do what they must.
 And settle debts.
 I don't value my life, Kindred. I want to die. My guilt is heavy, and conscience eats me from the inside like sand pest. Mother Boddho's warm flesh will soothe me. Do what you must. Lay me down.
 No. I forbid you to die. Live with what you've done. That's a punishment worse than death.
 Tell me everything.
 I honored your father. We weren't friends, but we had mutual respect. He understood me. Unlike others, he didn't despise me. He knew why I serve the Olgimskys.\nYour father was wise. But then he lost his mind, and invited death into the Town.
 Go on.
 He went to the steppe with Simon Kain that night. The one who built the Town upwards. Across the river. They were friends with him.\nThey dug Earth in the steppe. One of the Khatanghe saw. I learned of that and hurried to them.
 Why?
 I wanted to understand. Why dig, unless you have a corpse to bury?
 Go on.
 And then what?
 I found him at home. I found him sick.\nHe confessed that he was sick with sand pest. That it can't be stopped, <i>shouldn't</i> be stopped. That the Town needs it.\nHe spoke like a madman. I saw then that the disease drove him mad. I put him out of his misery.
 Put him out of his misery?
 The misery of both madness and sand plague.\nI wasn't in the Crude Sprawl five years ago. I only heard their screams—and my blood chilled, even though I don't frighten easy. The sand plague is torture, with no salvation.
 Father could decide that for himself.
 He spoke like a madman. He couldn't decide anything for himself.
 It wasn't your place, you mindless beast, to judge whether he was mad or too wise for you to understand!
 I forgive you, Oyun. Father would.
 Do it yourself. You have until tomorrow morning.
 Let it be so. Prepare to die.
 Who killed my father, Kindred?
 One of our own.
 Who, exactly?
 What for?
 I'll tell you when I'm sure our people have a future.
 You're playing with fire, Khatangher.
 No one from the Kin would dare lay a hand on him.
 Is he still staying in my father's house?
 He lost a lot of blood, emshen. You should sew him. You know how.
 Fine.
 He's strong. He won't be gone before he's due.
 Who's that with you?
 A state inquisitor.
 Why?
 My wife.
 Destination?
 Away from here.
 None of your business.
 Just seeing the sights.
 We have an order from General Block.
 Hey, over there! What are you waiting for? Seize her!
 Perhaps we can strike a bargain, lieutenant?
 Fine, fine. You've won. We're turning back.
 The inquisitor has finished her job here. She's returning to the Capital. I'm her escort.
 Step aside. We'll talk to you later.
 No, we'll talk now.
 I'm a doctor. Is anyone here sick?
 All right. I'll wait.
 I'm a doctor. Sanitary inspection. Any infected among you?
 Quarantine breach. And there was a special order regarding the inquisitor.\nAs I said, you're free to go. The Town is to the north. I won't repeat myself a third time.
 …
 Think you're above the fear of death…?
 You won't live to see tomorrow.
 It's not your blood.
 This blood belongs to everyone.
 Why would an emshen need shoohan, living blөөd? You do not knөөw what to do with it.\nOur blөөd is shared. You are not part of us. You are different. Your blөөd is different.
 I feel like I'm dying without it.
 If I have a gulp, maybe I <i>will</i> become part of you.
 I <i>am</i> like you.
 Tsoe she daa? Who are үүou?
 A yargachin.
 An emshen.
 Mes zasliin emch.
 I know. It's an old legend.
 Are they immune to the plague?
 Unente. This is so.\nDo you know why we dance barefoot?
 Tell me.
 I do. I grew up here.
 We can also open things up—but not like you, butchers. We dance with Earth. We touch her with our feet, we caress it, yargachin.\nWe pry her open. To make herbs grow. To make air heady with its odor. To have food for our cattle.
 This air reeks of death.
 Yes, that's why they call you Herb Brides.
 We know how to open things up. Our way. You know how to open things up. Your way. Do you want to know why the sand pest passes us by? Show yourself.\nCut a living sister in such a way that she stays living. You can do it, if you know the Lines.
 You're crazy!
 And your clothes split open as you dance, too. Which is why you're dressed like that.
 If you need to pry something open, you don't need to cut it. The best tear is the one that appears on its own. This is the way of love.\nYou butchers are less gentle. You are allowed to cut with knives.
 True.
 I think I've done all I could for today. Now all that remains is to wait until the coast is clear.
 I think I've done all I can for today. Now all that remains is to wait until the coast is clear.
 I'm done with everything important for today. I'm free to rest until tomorrow… or explore the Town. At night, its face changes.
 I am glad you came.
 I am glad you waited.
 So you're no longer inquisitor…
 All right. Go into the train car. I'll be right behind you.
 As you say.
 I'm no butcher. You're no cattle.
 All right.
 Do it, yargachin. Prove that they call you emshen for a reason. Do you want to know the truth? See, she's not afraid. Why do you tremble, then?
 Ugh. Have it your way.
 Wait. I need some time to collect my thoughts.
 
 
 Kid
 There's a metal crust on the side of our town. And it's growing.\nThe Warehouses are made of iron, and they grow into the earth. The Big Station is made of iron, and its railroad grows into it, too.
 And what does that mean?
 The Warehouses aren't made of iron. I think it's zinc.
 The Station infects the earth with iron.\nYou're a doctor—right? So tell me, is it good or bad?
 Well, there's nothing good about infection.
 Soil contains a lot of iron anyway.
 I don't know… What do you think?
 What? Who cares! Your zinc is iron too.
 Well… in a way.
 So what?
 Yeah, but that's inside! That's native iron. Inside-iron. Like in blood.
 Huh, you're a biologist.
 What's the difference, anyway?
 Your answer ain't good enough.\nThe Station is infecting the steppe with iron. Is it good or bad?
 It's tolerable.
 It's bad.
 It's not a thing you should judge.
 Nuh-uh! Actually, it's very good. I think it is. All those iron seeds will grow, and our town will grow, too.\nThere are different kinds of infection.
 Any kind of infection means death.
 The Town will grow, but the steppe will die. That's how infection works.
 Yeah, well… take a walk through town and check out an <i>actual</i> infection.
 Anyway, doctor, can you make it so that it never stops?\nYou're a doctor. You fight infection. Well, don't touch this one, all right?
 How would I go about curing this one, anyway?
 I cure illness in people's bodies… I can't cure iron in the earth.
 No. I detest all kinds of infection.
 You'll find out soon. Not today, but soon.\nIf you don't believe me, ascend the Tower—they'll let you in there this time. Perhaps you'll see something. Or maybe you won't.
 They'll let me into the Polyhedron? It would be a waste to miss that opportunity!
 I won't play your games, kids. I have a game of my own.
 Not today, huh? Well, in that case, I'm not even sure I'll live to see it.
 …Iron creeps into the steppe: the railroad. Iron creeps into the steppe: elongated things. Also: rusty wheels. Train wheels in grass.
 Also, old car parts. And dilapidated factories.
 Earth can digest anything, don't worry.
 Oh yeah! The Factory too! It turns bulls into canned meat—same process!\nIs it true that the Factory was a Foundry first? 'Cause they found copper in the steppe?
 True. But then the copper disappeared somehow. So they turned it into a slaughterhouse.
 Judging by our piping, it's plausible.
 …Me, I don't like iron. It's wicked. Alien. And rusty.
 "Iron—Cold Iron—shall be master of you all!" Do you know that poem?
 Who does…
 Yeah? Well, I like it. Iron is my ally. My tools are made of it.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Khan
 Capella
 Can't you see we're in the middle of a conversation? You're interrupting.
 Why is no one ever happy to see me?
 A familiar tone. Maria Kaina's brother, are you?
 You are a doctor—a brave and useful person. So I'll be patient and won't stoop to quarrel. But do understand—Capella and I will not continue our conversation until you leave.
 Go on, then. Talk.
 It's no secret.\nIf you see her, tell her everything is fine in the Polyhedron. Let her worry about coming into Mother's role. Got it?
 I think so. There weren't too many long words. But maybe you could repeat it, just in case.
  
  
  
 I'm so pleased to see you. Please, meet Caspar. We call him Khan. I haven't formally introduced him to you before, have I?\nWe were just discussing our plans for after the outbreak.
 Planning a future together, huh?
 You don't look too happy.
 I… no, I phrased that wrong. Well, not wrong, but… never mind.\nCan I be of any help?
 Nah. I can see I'm a third wheel here.
 Yes. Finish your conversation and go home.
 Officer
 Apostate
 I'm not authorized to tell you.
 Where's General Block?
 So you're leaving, huh?
 Yes.
 Where's General Block?
 At HQ.
 I see.
 Where did you two come from? I thought all the children evacuated.
 Everyone who wanted to stay, did.\nLike your kids. Have you checked on them recently?
 More or less…
 They're still alive. That's what matters.
 The Tower was brilliant in every way, except for one. Whoever lived there could never grow up.\nIt was interesting, in a way. But it was getting stale.
 So you want to grow up, huh?
 The Tower gets in our way. It's too strong a temptation.\nI guess it would be easier for us if it just disappeared. But while it's still there, our will isn't strong enough to refuse it. So there we stay. Glued.\nYou could do something about it, y'know.
 No. You should train your will, instead.
 I won't. It's up to you. That's how you grow up, too.
 So you want to get rid of temptation, huh? Sure, I can help you.
 Three couriers have been here, but they all missed the general. So they went out into the Town to look for him.
 Where is he? The general?
 "Once again..." Your military is a circus!
 This will not be discussed.
 So where is Block?
 He went out to restore order. Longin's people had three outposts in the Town, so he could be at any one of them.
 So the couriers went after him? And they split up?
 I guess.\nLongin's men had three outposts. That's all I know.
 I'll go look for them, then.
 I'll wait here.
 Damn it! Time's running out…
 Be my guest. There's sure to be a fight, but I know the general will pull through. He's not the type to be killed by a stray bullet.
 …For now.
 No, I can't wait.
 However it goes with the rebels, our train departs today at twenty-two hundred. Those are our orders.
 So the bombardment is off?
 The Army departs at ten, then? I should hurry…
 Depends on who wins. I've heard that half the officers want to pay this wretched town back. But the general would rather avoid it.\nOr perhaps it's the other way around? Who knows. In any case, we're leaving at ten.
 Well, there <i>is</i> a structure it would make sense to flatten…
 Then we should avoid it.
 Yeah? And who'll take pity on <i>me?</i>
 Mother Boddho is full of living blood. She forms us from her body. We live, as long as she lives. She lives, as long as steaming blood flows through her.
 I see…
 Brides caress Earth with their feet. Worms dwell in it. The throatless emerge from soil whenever Earth wants people to hear her.
 …And Sand Pest.
 You went the wrong way, emshen. You stumble through the wrong path. Be khara, you know not what you look for.\nThe sand pest is the scream of Mother Boddho. We are her murmur. Now, she murmurs lovingly to you, like an infant.
 But which of us is the child and which is the parent?
 We run out of words, essegher. Out of sounds. Hard to speak. Throatless, tongueless! Wordless.\nPlease take pity on our mother yours-and-mine, essegher. Kill us not. Boleesh, boleesh, byy alysh…
 I'll have to kill <i>someone.</i>
 I understand.
 Yes… I do pity you. More humans will be born, but your kind is irreplaceable.
 What are you getting at?
 No. I don't want to inhabit an earth that would do <i>this</i> to humans.
 Don't humans do worse by her? Why do they pierce her? Why do they build unbearable towns upon her body? She is so terribly burdened. Her ribs crack under this town's weight. It may be small, but it is heavier than many.
 It's tough for everyone.
 Show us if you are a good menkhu, emshen. Show us you know how to connect things.
 What things?
 Sure, just give me a rope.
 The emshen is modest. It takes no wisdom to see that a cord connects mother to child, yes. It takes no wisdom to see that a stone falling into a river connects to the ripples on the surface. \nBut to see the connection between the stone and the mother? It does nenpa gu dzom, emshen.
 What do I need to connect? And where?
 All you need to do is place them close to one another.
 It's people who connect things. Touch one, then another—and a connection forms.
 Touch them how?
 With a glance. Just the way you like it.
 With a thought, obviously. Real connections are formed in the mind.
 With a hand, of course.
 Here, on these rocks. You know how it works. A table to cut and mix.
 But I need… I need herbs, roots. Where can I get them?
 But I've got nothing on me.
 Take what you find around. Should we wait for you?
 No. I know what to do.
 Yes.
 I'll have to work on this stone slab?
 Yes.
 I can't brew much on it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Speak to me.
 Who are you?
 I am a zurkhen. I am your heart, Khatangher. \nYou have connected things, so you can now hold me in your hand. Hear my voice as if I were a stranger.\nSpeak to me.
 What's going on here?
 You now see the nature of the Kin.\nLook: The sand pest shirks the quiet and the humble. The ones who do not know the thought of <i>self.</i> Who do not reach upward…
 …But walk on all fours instead. I see.
 This is a lie. Or are you saying the thousands that died in the Termitary were not of the Kin?
 They lived in a stone sack. Torn away from Earth, stuck into a town, to work in a factory and become like people.\nWho severs themselves from people and from land, dies.
 It wasn't their fault.
 Not about blame. Earth cares not if you have guilt.\nThe ones who keep roots underground; who walk barefoot; who sleep in Earth's hold, fear no pain. The ones who forget how badly Earth can hurt die broken by that pain.
 By Earth's pain—do you mean the sand pest?
 That which you call the sand pest is just an aspect of Earth. Her agony, her scream, her voice.\nIt's only lethal to humans, but not to those who forget the word <i>I.</i> Not to those who speak little. Those who have no need of words don't feel it at all.
 So the sand pest is only lethal to humans?
 What matters is <i>someone</i> still believes. Your people believed all these centuries. Else why feed her blood so many years?\nA pity she's dying. Few of your people remain. With them, their knowledge dies, too. And their silent language, that they used to convey and understand complex ideas.
 My people… are too frightening.
 This disease threatens only those who sever themselves from Earth. Stay with us and live.\nMerge with us. Return to us. We love you. Don't split off. You hurt without us just as much as I hurt, torn out of you… Return to your body, tangher… and your body is your people.
 I'm not an animal. I'm human.
 I want to live.
 A human's path leads always to death. Can't you see?\nAre you even human? Why did you return here to us, then? There's no way back from here.
 There is. The human way is to touch death. You said so yourself, heart.
 Stay here, with Mother Boddho, Earth, and live. Split off from her, become human, and die. A lovely choice…
 I can see the way. Tell me, heart, what is this pit?
 Great bulls were slaughtered here. Their blood trickled down into that pit, dissolving in Earth. Feeding her. Granting her life. Do you want to know if you're beast or human? Step into the abyss. Follow the bulls.
 On my own…?
 Like hell I will.
 Fine. I want to live. I'll stay.
 An aspect of the earth… I don't believe in its personification.
 Be simpler. Be silent. Abandon speech. You'll feel what they want you to know without it. When you need to express yourself, you'll find a way to connect to them without words, too.\nThere will be no other people. Everything will be united in Earth.
 Fine. I'll stay. I'll abandon speech.
 I won't be one of you. I'm human, not a bull.
 
 It can't be cut from the Earth. Means you can't cut it from us.
 So if I cure this disease… I'll hurt you?
 You know the answer.
 I don't believe it. It can't just all go away. You can't simply dissolve…
 The umbilical cord will stay. But what will flow through it?
 That's fine. You're not children anymore.
 Suits you fine.
 Don't you care for this loss? We are the last of our kind.
 …I do. You are unique.
 Some come, others go. Life doesn't stop just because one piece ceased to exist.
 No name.
 What are you made of?
 Of clay and bones.
 Are you the shabnak-adyg?
 Listen to the words. Mother Boddho wants to speak to you.
 Speak.
 Did Earth herself make you?
 To speak. To tell you.
 Then speak.
 You've chosen a strange place to meet.
 All is connected. All is whole. Flesh and Earth are the same.\nWe are made of Earth. Earth is soaked with blood. As we feed her, we create a khachirkhel.
 I figured that out already.
 The Brides stomped her. The Worms kneaded her. They helped Earth.
 The Brides?
 The Worms? You mean the odonghs?
 They awaken Earth. Caress it with touch. Herbs sprout. We appear.
 I see.
 All loops. The circle is complete. One turns into the other. All moves.\nEarth lives and creates strange things.
 Enough. I understand already.
 Don't talk. I understand without words.
 I'll give you a name.
 Name.
 I'll call you Artemy.
 I'll call you Isidor.
 I'll call you Hюmhan. A creature made of fingernails.
 Yes, yes.
 You are a creature of clay and bones.
 I'll call you Khooloy. I'll give you a throat.
 What do you want?
 <i>Khachirkhel</i> is "strange things," right? "Impossible things"?
 What do I need to learn?
 Khamgyin khachirkhaltay zүyl yuu veh?
 "The strangest thing in the world," huh… I guess it's you.
 Aurochs, the ancient bulls. "Buha-noyon," as they were called.
 Herb Brides. The ones who dance with Earth.
 The odonghs. Half-human, half-worm.
 The sand pest. I've never seen anything stranger.
 Earth. I have no other answer.
 Do you want me to give you a voice?
 Give me a voice.
 I name you Ushkhaan.
 The circulation of life's juices.
 I name you emshen. You can do much. You know how bodies are composed.
 Not all of them.
 How did Earth make you?
 They're worms in the soil. They make it softer. Kinder.
 So that's why they exist…
 I thought people called them Worms to humiliate them.
 It's not a disease. It's pain. Earth's anguish.\nWhat you call the sand plague is an aspect of Earth. An agony. A scream. Its voice. Its <i>medrel.</i>
 "Medrel." You mean the nerves?
 Emshen.
 You don't need to croak. I'll give you a throat. I name you Amahn.
 You are a wise doctor, maes zaslыm emch. Will you care for me?
 You're not sick.
 I'm a doctor. It's my job to destroy it. For the people.
 People have destroyed everything that makes Earth alive. They turned Olonngo into an Abattoir. They added a Termitary. They herded the people inside, robbed them of life.\nThey killed our last great bull.
 So how do I handle the disease? If you're all one and the same…
 I want to wake up.
 Mother Boddho speaks through me.\nListen, for she asks: Will you spare me? Will you let me live?
 I am a doctor. The only thing I fight is the disease. The sand plague.
 I couldn't hurt you even if I wanted to.
 Yes. I promise.
 What's wrong with you?
 If you do your job, I will die.
 My job is to cure the sand pest.
 I'm sorry.
 I don't want you to go. You make the world a more beautiful place.
 Hello, Father.
 So you're alive…?
 You seem angry with me.
 I'm not.
 Yes. See, I've done it. I'm just as surprised as you are.
 You've done what?
 I transcended death.
 How?
 I don't know.\nDeath is a mire, engulfing those who cross. But some escape.
 …What do I do now?
 I am.
 <i>You</i> seem angry with me.
 All I ever wanted was for you to understand what happened here. How it all went. Why it was needed.
 Is it true that you were the one who unleashed the plague?
 How?
 I've been told you're the reason for this outbreak.
 Too strong a word.
 You didn't stop it. You could have, like the first. But you didn't.
 Five years ago, I made a mistake. We never should have tried to hide from this disease. The Town needed to survive it. Or not.
 This is cruel.
 You let this plague happen.
 You were patient zero. You brought the plague to this town.
 Yes.
 But why?
 If you survive a disease, you develop immunity.\nOur town was grown in a greenhouse. It is a homunculus. Not particularly well adjusted to live on its own.\nWe couldn't support it forever. Simon and I were growing old. The Mistresses died. How would it fare without us?
 I don't understand.
 This town was… connected <i>wrong.</i> Its parts were tied with artificial seams—so different, so awkward. One could say that Simon, the Mistresses, and I held it all together by force.\nSo I tore it apart, so you can sew it all back, better than before. Because you're better, and smarter, than I am.
 You think my line of fate is more precise than yours?
 Why did you summon me?
 All I wanted was for you to understand, not follow any particular fate.
 So you did it for me…?
 Of course not. I did it for the Town. It needed a vaccination. Besides, it wasn't up to me.
 What are you trying to say?
 I stopped trying to ladle out the sea and walked straight into it. I made everyone walk with me, too. Teaching them to swim, so they'll no longer hide behind sand castle walls.
 You're saying horrible things. For the Town, huh? What about all the victims? Were they not part of the Town?
 The Town needs to move forward, but it doesn't insist. Facing the future is the way of love. Facing the past is the way of love.\nBut the two are incompatible, and it broke my heart.
 I choose the past, even with the plague and sand castles. I can't bear to lose all its uniqueness.
 You're right. The future is better than the past. Tell me more about it.
 You need not choose. Not yet.\nMoreover, you've already made your choice. Your actions did. For they were driven by love, whether you wanted that or not.\nLove came from understanding. Understanding creates connections. Connections are the Lines. The Lines are love.
 What should I do now, Father?
 My list… Those children will build the new Town. A better one.\nJust like the three families and their Mistresses built it before. Just like Simon and I built it, reaching to the stars.\nWe started it too quickly. We paid for our hastiness.
 What should I do now, Father?
 Do what you must. Do what you think is right. If you still have time, try to understand the world as best you can.\nYou won't make a mistake. I respect your choice—any choice. Like I said, you're better than me. You will connect us all into a new whole.
 I hope so.
 You'd do it better.
 I did not expect you to claw your way out of an earthen womb. So, were you disgorged by Earth too?\nMuch like me… We will understand each other better now, kholboön.
 Why are you here, Sahba?
 I've found the Eighth, Sahba. A heart beats down there.
 I ready the soil for sowing.
 What do you mean?
 It is time for the Kin to devour the Town. Earth is triumphant. The Town dies.\nWhen, if not now? Unente, nature demands what she is owed.
 So you <i>do</i> want the Kin to rebel and start a massacre?
 "Earth is triumphant"? What do you mean?
 Of course. It is good that it still beats. That blood still flows through its veins. So who is the Eighth?
 The Town.
 They wanted to start it today. But so many people died in the Warren… and now soldiers prowl the Town.\nThere will be no riot. But that changes nothing.
 Why?
 Good.
 So you see the sand pest as a force of nature?
 What will you do now, kholboön?
 Uphold Father's duty. I accepted it in your presence, remember?
 The Earth.
 Yes.
 I guess…
 No.
 Not all natural things must be endured.
 The Eighth is the Town. That's what Father called an udurgh. I know that now.
 I am a man of the Kin. Mother Boddho is my mother, too. She may be the udurgh.
 …Yeah.
 What are you doing here?
 Thinking.
 That's unlike you.
 We had a talk. I thought it'd be an interrogation. But no, we just… talked. For two hours.
 What'd you talk about?
 Something's… off about you.
 We're all toys, Cub. Just toys. Puppets.\nYou go about livin' an' breathin', all that, not a thought spared for your place in it all. But actually, you're pulled around by great strings. You think you're alive, but you ain't, pal. You ain't.\nWe have no right to call ourselves people.
 Wow. When'd you become such a philosopher?
 Nothing to do with philosophy. We are filled with cotton.
 Are we, now?
 She's an inquisitor, Grief. To her, everyone's on a hook or string.
 I don't want to live like that anymore. Perhaps I don't want to live at all. So, I'm thinking it over.
 …She broke you to pieces.
 You aren't. You're filled with clockwork.
 She knows what she's sayin'. She's a professional. She really is…\nI haven't figured it all out, not yet. But I've seen the light, Cub. I don't want to live like this.
 People who <i>see the light</i> gain the will to live. I suspect it wasn't that.
 By the way. If you could, could you drop by my warehouse? Just check on the guys. Tell 'em to lock the place up and scatter.\nTell 'em I said so. Tell 'em: "A long beak pecks millet." They'll listen.\nThey'll listen to you, anyway. They know you.
 Perhaps you should do it yourself?
 I can't do anything. Not from here. We've run all out of old Grief.
 All right… I'll pay them a visit. For the sake of an old friend.
 I won't do it. Deal with your people yourself.
 Were you arrested?
 Something like that, Cub. Not seized, so much, but bound.
 I'll tell her you're not as scary as you try to seem.
 What does she want with you?
 She was faster with me.
 Keep thinking, pal. Perhaps you'll clear your head a bit.
 You mean, like a storekeeper?
 Where would they go? Hunting in the night?
 That's up to them. I'm not their leader anymore. Tell 'em that.
 <i>You</i> tell them that.
 I don't like your tone.
 If you want to think of yourself as a puppet, go ahead. That's not how I perceive myself.
 Yes?
 What have you done to him?
 Me? I didn't do anything.
 He's all messed up!
 I have a unique approach to each person. Can't you see the man is thinking? Changing? Leave him be.
 What was he babbling about puppets? Did you tell him about that?
 Does he bother you?
 No.
 Did you interrogate him?
 No. He figured that out on his own.
 …Is that true?
 It's true for him. I don't know about <i>you.</i>
 Why is that?
 You are unlike anyone I have ever seen. Freer than other men. As though your strings are pulled by some manner of god.
 I don't believe in gods.
 Am I different, somehow?
 I think you… damaged him, somehow.
 Let him go.
 You think so?
 Well… no. In his condition, I'd rather he stayed put.
 Precisely.
 You convinced him that he's a toy. To what end?
 We all are. He's a toy, I'm a toy. Did you not know?
 You didn't mention me.
 To what do I owe the pleasure?
 Grief wants you to stop operations, lock up, and get lost.
 "The grass is always greener."
 "A long beak pecks millet."
 What's this bullshit?
 A password.
 You got a death wish?
 Do you?
 What a quick boy you are. Bad Grief's pal, huh? Well, Bad Grief's done. I'm in charge now.
 And who are you?
 Grief says hi.
 Nope.
 Go away. Lock the warehouse. And don't take anything with you.
 Well, I'm the one who drew the first knife. Ever heard of Barley the Barber?
 So those are your men cutting peaceful folk at night?
 Using knives is a rejection of the law.
 You've hurt an awful lot of people.
 Who's gonna stop us now? Whose law is it, forbidding knives?\nI'm done with your steppe preaching. Done. We're free people. If we wanna cut folks, we'll cut folks. I dare you to stop us.
 Oh, I <i>will.</i>
 He's not done.
 Done in our book. He bowed before the commissar wench and licked her boots—voluntarily!\nCouldn't have done worse if he'd tried. He's a mutt, not a leader.
 Which would make you the leader, correct?
 I won't get involved.
 We need to escape, Cub. Escape.
 You can't run from yourself, Grief.
 An' that's where you're wrong! Yourself, that's exactly who you should run from! Why would I want myself? A puppet on strings…
 You and puppets again!
 It's the only way to escape. Don't you get it? Fate belies freedom.\nYou're a toy. An' you can't become human while you have a fate. So you must break it! That's what your old man wanted from you!
 What do <i>you</i> know about what he wanted?!
 Every puppet plays a role.
 He tried to break his fate, an' the fate of the Town. So he died.
 What are you going on about?!
 Are you completely daft? I've been tellin' you for like an hour.\nYou aren't alive while you're part of someone else's design. Do you get it? That's why the sand pest came upon us, mowin' us down, and we do nothin'. How could we? Just toys…
 You're still out of it…
 I'm not escaping anywhere.
 Huh. Well… maybe you're right.
 How did you even arrive at this… philosophy?
 Where to?
 I'm tellin' you, she helped me understand. The woman. Here is the only place anything can be understood. We must stand by her.
 Oh, so she's no longer a wench to you?
 That's cowardly.
 No! It's not! I can't explain… sand pest kills the <i>unfree,</i> y'see?
 So?
 So don't play their games, not by their rules. Look at the big picture!
 What games? What rules?
 I don't.
 The designers of the whole thing.
 There's no design behind it all, Grief.
 It was "designed" by nature.
 Who cares! It's still a matter of freedom. Either you turn human an' survive, or stay a doll an' die. It's that simple.\nThe plague separates people from dolls. Got it?
 Hm. I thought about this myself…
 Grief. You're raving.
 You've never been much of a thinker. I think you might've short-circuited this time…
 No, not a wench. A woman.\nShe's almost human, y'know. At least she gets what's goin' on here. An' she opened my eyes, too.
 Opened your eyes to what?
 What a lovely, empathetic woman.
 What did you tell him? About people, and puppets?
 That is none of your concern, Burakh. It's his.
 That so? In that case, what <i>is</i> my concern?
 If you really plan to make that panacea of yours, do what you think is right. I'll cover for you.\nBut the order from the Town Hall was clear: All doctors are to work at the hospital, sharing their duties.\nYou are to report daily—and <i>work.</i> Or else there will be consequences.
 What can I do right now?
 Any suggestions?\nIn any case, this is now a hospital. Your place is here. Be so kind as to stay and do your job.
 I'll drop by, but I won't confine myself here. I have another plan.
 We need to make medicine. And I can't do that here.
 What consequences?
 You'll be removed from the Pest Fund lists and receive no monetary support.\nIn my book, Cub, it's not about the money, but a clear conscience. Your duties as a doctor.
 I'm not trying to slack off.
 I thought we already discussed my current duties.
 We're short on painkillers. Can you brew more?
 What about medicine? Is the hospital not supplied?
 Where would we take it from? Medicine stores? All stocks are running low, since the train wasn't here on time.\nThey'll requisition what they can. Dankovsky is in charge of that. But we need more right now.
 I'll try.
 I can.
 I'm low on resources myself.
 I'm… at a loss. I've never seen a serious outbreak. And this…
 Yeah…
 All right. I'll have a look at the patients.
 Listen. Was there really not a single recovery?
 Not a single one. Neither was there one five years ago. I don't know of any other such disease.
 Huh...
 Pneumonic plague. There was no salvation either. And no vaccines helped.
 So how's your panacea going?
 An oak isn't felled in one stroke.
 It's not a panacea! Where did you even get that word?
 …Too many corpses today. More than yesterday. They can barely cart them all away.
 How long does it take for the sand pest to kill a patient?
 Look, I really think you're being unfair to Grief.
 No one stayed alive for more than a day. If the patient has a weak constitution, or no medicine, it takes closer to eight hours.
 And antibiotics? Properly prescribed, they can extend their life…
 Ugh.
 Didn't take you long to forget your friend.
 I do not deny our old friendship. But I don't want to see him, not anymore—nor do I want to patch up his bandits.
 Bandit is too impressive a title. They're petty criminals.
 He helped you, hasn't he? With whatever it is you're doing in the Warehouses.
 Who drew knives? Who attacked people at night? His thugs! He cuts them loose! The man giving the orders deserves the blame.
 I don't think those are his men.
 Why not?
 He has no control over them. He admitted that himself.
 I don't believe that.
 Whatever.
 You don't believe him, you don't believe me. Do you even believe yourself?
 I remember Mentor talking about it. I always forget your steppe word… the three states? Is that what you mean?
 Yes.
 Could you at least find the right antibiotics for some patients here? Perhaps some would survive a day or two. Then you could rescue them with that panacea of yours.
 Is that my job for today?
 Where are they buried?
 The three Layers.
 I guess.
 All right. Consider it done.
 I'll need to brew the antibiotics first, or buy them… It'll take time.
 So you do believe I can do it, after all?
 I don't know. Ask Dankovsky. He manages it all. I just do my job.
 So there are still no recoveries?
 Ah, there you are…
 What's today's job?
 Stay strong. I think I'm making progress.
 I haven't been wasting time, either.
 What do you mean?
 So how's it made? Get blood with antibodies, mix with a tincture?
 You want to try yourself?
 Yes, more or less.
 I can see that. You look exhausted, Stakh. You need some rest.
 Today's job is downright ugly. Perfect for the likes of you and I. Autopsies—a lot of them.
 How many is "a lot"?
 Never mind.
 Are you hiding something?
 Substantial?
 I hope it will all come to fruition soon.
 Very substantial.
 I'd rather not guess. But you'll be the first to know when I succeed.
 We need organs—to study them. Infected, healthy… all kinds of them. Not blood, though. Orderlies can collect it without our help.\nI'll do most of the work, but that's no reason for you to slack off.
 What exactly will be studied?
 Examining infected organs makes sense, but why would we need healthy ones?
 What an opportunity for practice, Stakh! No one would blacklist you, either.
 I guess… but I just don't have the energy anymore for all this.
 I'll help you out. Autopsies, huh?
 The disease mutates. The clinical picture changes. They all have different symptoms…\nWe're no longer sure which organs become damaged first. So we'll have to figure it out.
 But how? We don't have a clinical picture. We know nothing!
 Leave that to Dankovsky. Our job is to extract the organs and put them in the ice box—there, on the stage. Let Dankovsky be the one to rummage through them.
 Oh, so this is all his idea? I see.
 You seem less like an adoring fan. That's nice to see.
 He works hard, but I've yet to see the results.
 If he's making the same progress I am, there's still hope.
 …Are you implying the same about me, I wonder?
 You know I never imply. I tell things straight.\nAnd… I shouldn't have said the things I said back then. Mentor would be proud of you now. He <i>was</i> proud of you.
 Peace, then?
 Peace.
 Let bygones be bygones.
 All's well that ends well.
 The show's over.
 I'm a doctor.
 It's not just a theatre, pal. There's a hospital inside.
 Entry's forbidden. There's nothing of interest inside. It's all over.
 What do you mean?
 We have received a clear report. Everyone who gets infected dies. There's no cure. There's no chance of salvation.\nSo why would you need a hospital? It only makes the germs swarm.
 Were you brought up at an apiary, pal…?
 Let me in, I'm telling you!
 But there is a chance. And there is a cure.
 You got it with you right now? You said you were a doctor, huh?
 I do. But not for you.
 I am. If I give you a cure, will you let me in?
 …This division doesn't disobey orders. The general is very strict about the chain of command.
 I can appreciate that.
 Yeah, General Ashes, beast of a man… I've heard a lot about him.
 We need an isolation ward. A huge building—"spacious," yes, that's the word I used. The Kains suggested the Cathedral. That's it. Nothing surprises me anymore.\nThen again, all a quarantined person has left is prayer.
 But it's a single space. No separate rooms.
 Do you plan to work today, doctor?
 What do we have today?
 A lot of patients died last night… They moaned for a while, and then they stopped. I guess some are still breathing. Nestling next to the corpses, twitching. Can't tell anymore…
 What? You've turned the hospital into a morgue!
 And who are you?
 Grigory Gorky, doctor. A coal-heaver. I'm a Kains' man.
 A coal-heaver? Why is there a coal-heaver in the hospital?
 Well… kinda. I guess.\nIf you yoke yourself to death's plough, you might as well claim you've done so voluntarily. Hurts your dignity less.
 What's today's job?
 …I've made up my mind, you know. If I survive all this, I leave.\nNever to return.
 Where would you go?
 I don't know. To the front.
 Very funny.
 Me too. Perhaps we should go together?
 I guess it's safer than here.
 [he's not dead, only sleeping]
 How are you, friend? Completely exhausted, huh?
 That's all right. Have some sleep.
 …………..
 Remember that time at the Scruff, when we had that fight? You said you're bound to this land. That you'd been born here, and will die here. That you didn't want me to leave… That's when it all went downhill between us, wasn't it?
 ……
 See how it turned out? I'm back, but you seem to be leaving. Father was the only thing that kept you anchored, wasn't he? You were loyal to the land because of him. Now, you're all alone. So you're running to death's embrace. Anywhere, away from here.
 Can you hear me?
 ……
 You could… stay. Father's gone, but perhaps someone could take his place in your heart. Maybe you could marry Lara. Become a father yourself. Things would turn around…
 All right, sleep some more. I'll stop pestering you.
 Well, you don't have to answer.
 Yulia. Yulia Lyuricheva. And you are…?
 Artemy Burakh. A doctor.
 Just a local ripper.
 Can I do anything?
 Why did you come?
 I just want to be of help.
 You're a scientist. There's no work for you here.
 How can I help you?
 What can you do?
 Little in the way of medicine. I'm a mathematician specializing in spatial calculations. The finite-element method… I doubt you'd be interested.
 Oh, but I am.
 You're not a local, right?
 Of course. I arrived at Simon Kain's request to lay out the roads and plan the Town's development.
 Huh… Our town doesn't look like it was planned by a mathematician.
 The Kains had a rather unusual notion of how they wanted the Town's routes planned. They believed the routes of choice influence people's mood. Their soulstate.\nI found the challenge intriguing, if a bit insane.
 "A bit"? The Kains are completely off their rocker.
 Well, they have built the Polyhedron, haven't they? There it is. I was even allowed to ascend it. Though I wasn't allowed inside…\nThe Cathedral, the Crucible, the Stillwater; all those buildings are machines that work with the same idea.
 What idea?
 So the Town's streets are your doing?
 Not all of them, but yes, to some extent.
 Why the hell did you make the Town so awkward to navigate, then?
 The Kains implied that the Town already has something akin to a nervous system. They suggested I view it as a huge, living creature. So my job was… acupunctural.
 Do you take the Kains' ideas seriously?
 No.
 It all failed. The isolation ward in the Cathedral, the hospital in the Theatre… Even the cemetery is an issue now.
 At least you tried.
 Why do you think it failed?
 Was there a single person who left this hospital healthy?
 But at least we studied the disease.
 But at least people had hope.
 The Town is dying. And now this inquisitor…\nThe Powers That Be know everything. They won't be lenient anymore.
 Yeah? What can they do? Send the Army?
 The Army… No, I don't suppose they would do that. What's the point? It would just be a waste of soldiers.
 Cheer up. We've found the cure already. Victory is at hand.
 See? It could have been even worse.
 Shh! Listen to swevery grow.
 Swevery?
 I can't hear anything.
 Here? Here, I guess… Here.
 All right. Go ahead, show me.
 It's beautiful here.
 Do you often come here alone? Aren't you scared?
 We need swevery. And twyre. A blade of each kind. It's pretty!
 It is, but I'm not sure what you want me to do.
 What was it… Murky? Look at me. Are you messing with me?
 Now you go pick grass!
 Which plants?
 I just told you! Swevery, and three kinds of twyre. Pretty blades. Don't you know which grass is magic?
 Why don't you do it yourself?
 All right…
 Okay, swevery and three kinds of twyre. Right. Now to fulfill my dream of being an errand boy…
 I will when I hear it call. But that takes time.
 Well, I'm in no hurry.
 Sure, I'll bring you back a whole bushel of herbs.
 No. I don't cheat.
 How do you know all that? About the dead?
 Because that's how I talk to mom and dad.
 They're… they're dead, yes?
 Perhaps you're only imagining that?
 No, I'm not! I'm not!
 Your mom and dad… Who were they?
 They died. Five years ago. Bad disease. A lot of people died.
 Five years ago?
 Where did it happen?
 Here. We lived in the Crude Sprawl.
 Five years ago? You're barely older than six.
 Oh my…
 Yes. Five years ago.
 How can you remember that? Impossible.
 Five years ago? You're barely older than six.
 I don't remember what happened. But mom and dad told me. It's true!
 All right, all right, I believe you.
 Why did I even come here…
 Yes, these are the right blades. Magic enough.
 How can you tell which herbs are magic?
 So what do we do now?
 What am I supposed to teach? You just need to want it really hard. Close your eyes tight, too. It'll happen.
 So it's all just… daydreaming?
 Ugh, kids. What did I expect? I knew nothing good would come of this.
 I did not lie. I did not. I don't need you. Nuh-uh. At all.
 Who cares if you need me!
 It's my own fault for taking a kid too seriously.
 What is there about you to love? I don't want to. Nuh-uh.
 I'm not imposing myself on you.
 …Don't you have anyone to wipe your face? You're all covered in dirt. See you, grumpy.
 The ones that grow from a person. A person-in-the-ground, I mean. Like mom and dad. You wanted to talk to your dad, right?
 I still do.
 I'm just wondering how you think it's possible.
 Go ahead, then. Talk to him.
 How? I thought you wanted to teach me.
 What do you mean? What nonsense is this?
 Will these ones do the trick?
 I've got everything already.
 The boös has an urgent matter do discuss with you, Master Burakh. It concerns your family home.
 It's always urgent with everyone… Tell him I'll drop by later today.
 And to this the boös told me to reply: "This matter has to be resolved before sundown. Otherwise you'll lose both the house and a large sum of money."
 Got it.
 This seems important. Let's go there right now.
 Very well. Lead the way.
 Thank you for the hospitality, boös. But I'll be on my way.
 Good thing you've come to visit, Master Burakh… Right on time… Early bird gets the worm, indeed. The Kains plan to take away your house. \nIsidor's dead, God rest his soul, and his heir is on the run… The decision will be made today.
 Why are the Kains even involved?
 You knew I was back. Wasn't your word enough?
 As you should know, the Town is ruled by three families…\nI hold the economy. The Abattoir, the Factory, the Station, the Warehouses… Known collectively as the Bull Enterprise. A silly name, but it stuck… Saburov upholds the peace, he handles the populace. And the Kains… the Kains build. Houses, other structures, general planning… All on them.
 I don't get it. Please explain.
 You don't know our history? That's a shame…\nThe Kains built our town on their fancy ideas… Composed an entire philosophy of town planning, heh heh. Experimenting on human souls, no less.\nThey see the Town as a machine. A tool. A special place, like a crucible for remaking the mind and spirit of man.
 What do they want to forge people into?
 I know this.
 That's harsh.
 Does it work?
 They want to forge an overman, one to rival God. Not even to forge one, but to let him grow up on his own. Idealistic airheads… That's who they are.\nMe, I pull the chain the other direction. Humans are beasts. The simpler, the more useful, heh heh… At least my little theory proves itself right with plentiful coin.
 Why do they want my father's house?
 Depends on how you look, Master Burakh… Oh, it depends. It's not for me to judge. I am a down-to-earth man, yes… I work with meat, not castles in the sky.\nBut at times, they build compelling things. They have a special interest in the spaces inside buildings.
 What kind of interest?
 Get to the point.
 The Kains see all houses, including yours, as cogs in a machine. They might decide to demolish it, or do something else entirely. \nThe late Simon Kain was close to your father. One could say they were friends. Opposites truly do attract… Yes, they do.
 So what do I do?
 Go see the Judge, that is, Georgiy Kain. With his brother Simon dead, he is in charge. Go to him and assert your claim… \nHurry. Georgiy wakes at dawn and never takes back decisions… That's just how he is.
 Thank you, boös.
 I don't want that house. Too many heavy feelings.
 If you don't want the house for yourself, I'll be happy to take it off you. I'll pay you good money for it… Never let a good thing go to waste, I always say. There's no changing the Kains' minds with money—they have enough. You, however, might succeed.\nGo see the Judge, and soon. It might be too late in an hour or two.
 Alright, I'll look into it.
 What do you propose we do?
 Let them have it.
 The Kains live in the Crucible, right?
 Can I help you?
 Are you the Judge?
 The Judge is in his workshop. What business brings you to him?
 Personal business.
 You're Artemy Burakh.
 How do you know?
 September's been rough this year.
 I thought you'd ask how I got into this coffin…
 And just who are you?
 Your companion.
 An eternal one, looks like.
 I've figured out who you are.
 You survived death. This is your victory. You're the only survivor.
 Survived… death? Is this some kind of joke?
 So I'm going to live forever now?
 …Only survivor?
 Why does the disease kill some, but not others? After all, it seemed like everyone could have fallen seriously, terminally ill.\nMaybe it's the same with death in general. We think it obliterates everyone. But if you act just so, your intellect can overcome death—just as your body overcomes plague or typhus!
 So how <i>do</i> you defeat death?
 Maybe. If you wanted to.
 Maybe I will.
 I don't think so. You bore me.
 Or maybe you're not the only one… I don't know how many you've managed to touch. Or will manage to.\nYou still have the entire rest of the day to share your goodbyes with whomever you wish, to touch a last few souls.
 Goodbyes? What's the point?
 Goodbyes? What's the point?
 How does one <i>survive</i> death?
 By realizing that death is not a vanishing. It's a boundary. You can step over any chasm if you're convinced it's just another obstacle.\nIt's naive to think victory over death means immortality. Immortality is tiring if you remain who you are. Much more so if you fall into decline.
 If not immortality, then what? Where's the answer?
 What have you done to the Town? And what has the Town done to you?\nYou wouldn't have been able to solve this problem without each other, different creatures as you are. An enormous town, a small person, an undetectably minuscule microbe. Three of you. You needed each other.
 And what exactly <i>have</i> I done to the Town?
 You understood it. You bound its severed parts together. Drawing new connections between things that seemed incompatible—that is the essence of understanding. To understand is to become someone else.\nWhat seemed like death to the former you is just a crack in the earth for the new you. It's still rather wide, but you can get across.
 As if the Town cared whether I understood it or not…
 You took pity on your town. You went where love led you. You decided the last of the miraculous creatures must not be deprived of their lives. You realized the plague itself was alive. You cherish everything alive.\nLook—the Town is grateful to you. It has changed.
 What's going to happen to its inhabitants?
 You've given your town a future. You've weaned it from the earth, and that's something. The nourishing umbilical cord must be severed at some point.
 Can we do without that?
 I don't know. I'm letting them go, you hear? I'm officially waiving my claim to them. Go say goodbye. They want to say goodbye to you, too.
 Thank you, fellow traveler. It matters.
 Yes. I should say farewell.
 The people will become free. They'll discover their destinies within the Town, and those destinies will shape it. They'll think of death how you've grown to think of death. Whoever survives something like this has nothing to fear.\nGo say goodbye to them.
 Not my kind of freedom. There's something… wrong, about all of this.
 I'll just say my goodbyes.
 What do you have there? Did you catch a tiny little mouse for me?
 I brought you something to eat, to return the favor. Take it.
 We knew it! We knew you'd do it! Lina didn't believe it, Barrel didn't believe it, but Tom-Tom and I knew it: He'll figure it out on his own, he doesn't need nudges or hints to bring us something back. And you did! \nYou're such a good person. Can I hug you?
 Not now, kid. I'm covered in blood.
 Go ahead.
 I think I should come here more often. Maybe I'll start believing I'm a good person, too.
 This place has been picked clean. Nothing more to loot. If you're feeling brave, check the neighboring houses. Maybe they have something left.
 Any luck with the house, Master Burakh?
 Plenty. Thank you for your counsel.
 First they locked the Termitary. Then the murders. Now the Factory's stopped—unheard of! Fat Vlad would work us to death with no rest or sleep, his domain never stops!\nAnd now they're cordoning off districts, too? What's going on?
 I wonder myself...
 An outbreak. There's an outbreak.
 Move aside and let me through.
 Grief comes in spades these days. Who could have known the Polyhedron will turn out this way?
 How did it turn out, exactly?
 Where is Georgiy?
 I am Isidor Burakh's son. I'm here about our house.
 The workshop is in the right wing of the mansion. We're in mourning today, but I think he'll want to meet you.
 You seem troubled.
 You're in mourning too?
 Yes. Simon, our patriarch, died two days ago under mysterious circumstances. Haven't you heard?
 I haven't.
 I have.
 Strange. The whole Town knows. People loved him. He was this village's creator, after all.
 …How old was he?
 Quite old. You're Burakh's son, so you must've spent your youth here. Haven't you heard stories of Simon?
 Of course I have.
 I heard he was a close friend of my father, who also died two days ago. An odd coincidence, don't you think?
 Odd indeed—if a coincidence at all. I hope Saburov's people can unravel this case.
 I hope so too.
 I'll unravel it myself.
 What is this thing you've built here? How does it stay upright?
 From the Capital, we have summoned the Stamatin brothers—two architects. They've come forth with a bold project: a contraption that defies gravity. \nIn the Capital, they were ridiculed. We thought differently, and so we granted them this opportunity. As you can see, the Polyhedron soars.
 I sense a but.
 But the Polyhedron took away our children. The Tower fascinates them. Inside, they've built something like a sovereign country, with my own son in charge. No one has any idea how to make them leave.
 Are you afraid that the Tower will collapse?
 No. It's just that the Tower… does something to them. They don't explain this to outsiders, but I think it materializes illusions. Some sort of optical effect. Vibrations too, of course…\nSimon was adamant that we do not hinder the children in any way. Claimed this was the entire reason for the construction. But… I want my son back.
 What's his name?
 Caspar. Kids call him Khan. He is their leader. I suppose, as his father, I should be proud.
 Khan. Wait… He was among the children my father taught.
 Yes. He and your father spent a lot of time together last year. \nSimon and Isidor gathered some kind of coterie of children. Ones they had special hopes for. I didn't have enough time to grasp the things those two taught our children.
 I see. I'd like to speak to Khan, if you don't mind.
 Well… They do come out from time to time. Less often than I'd like. \nAbandon any hope of entering the Polyhedron, though. They don't let adults in.
 I'm going to try anyway.
 Can you describe their teachings?
 I cannot. I'm sorry, but I just don't know. I trusted Simon and your father. They would not harm children.
 Is your son in the Tower right now?
 Why have you let them in?
 My brothers, Simon and Georgiy, insisted that we have to let children play. In a way, I agree with them. \nThis is why we Kains create all these buildings, after all. To change people.
 And it doesn't matter to you if they change people for the better or for worse, does it?
 Thank you. I'll go and see the Judge now.
 So those children are running wild now, living by their own laws?
 Don't ask me how that happened. There was no sinister plan behind this. In a single day people have accepted this state of affairs. \nThis town does strange things to us. I think this experiment might be out of our control now. No surprise, given that Simon is dead…
 And your son…
 I know you.
 A genius.
 Why are you here then?
 I wonder what sort of creature this Aspity is. Perhaps she can tell my fortune… As it is, I'm somewhat depressed.
 So you want to know the future?
 What exactly are you planning on asking her?
 Same. Nice to meet you.
 No. I know what the future holds for me. I'm simply curious.
 Curious about what?
 I wonder how long my tower will hold. I wonder if Farkhad forgave me… if Brother is angry with me… I wonder about many things.
 The Tower… You mean the one that grew in the Stone Yard?
 All right. See you.
 "Grew"? It isn't a weed. We built it. Or don't you like it?
 It's… impressive.
 It scares me.
 I do.
 Who is Farkhad?
 A talented corpse. A capable architect, though far below my league. He built the Cathedral.
 Ah! I see.
 I remember his grave in the Cemetery. The one with the eye.
 My brother and I built it. Killed him ourselves, buried him ourselves.
 I see.
 So that's why you drink, huh? An uneasy conscience is a heavy burden.
 
 
 Something's brewing in Grief's soul. He asked me to disperse his old crowd and lock up the Warehouse.
 Bad Grief asked to disperse his old crowd and lock up the Warehouse. Not a fan of the idea…
 
 
 I'm a coward.
 I killed Barley. Grief's old business is over.
 
 
 
 "Yas" Antibiotic
 "Zürkh" Antibiotic
 "Medrel" Antibiotic
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from infected blood.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't heal completely, but lowers the chance of death.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't heal completely, but lowers the chance of death.
 Man is a microbe for a town and a town for a microbe. Billions of useful bacteria inhabit our body; we would be empty and dead without them. And they're barely distinguishable from lethal microbes.\n\nAntibiotics deal with it by simply murdering everything living. They're no panacea.
 
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Flesh, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from infected blood. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from infected blood. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from infected blood. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from infected brain tissue. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from infected brain tissue. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from infected brain tissue. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected heart. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected heart. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected heart. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected kidney. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected kidney. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected kidney. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected liver. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected liver. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 ???
 A potion with unknown properties. Made from an infected liver. I must test it on a patient.
 This potion was made from infected flesh. By adding active compounds to a bacterial culture, I've prepared a medicine that should suppress the infection. Now it's time to put theory into practice.
 Barley
 Are you the prefect of this district?
 In the flesh.
 Isn't your job keeping people's things in their houses, and not the other way around?
 Good, I was looking for you. As Isidor's son and heir, I claim our house. Here is a paper from the Judge.
 That's a fancy paper indeed, but I'm afraid you won't be living in that house anytime soon.
 The house belongs to me.
 What the hell do you mean?
 What I said. These things belong to everyone now. The owners have fled. You may take whatever they left.
 Why are you so calm at a time like this?
 Where did they go?
 Damned if I know. Somewhere the soot won't reach them, I reckon.
 Why haven't you left with them?
 I have a job to do.
 You must be the local prefect.
 Haven't you been outside? The air's no longer fit to breathe. I heard there was a blowout at the Factory yesterday, must be the soot settling down, choking people to death.
 So what now?
 What do you mean?
 The poor and the brave might still be around, trying to salvage what little they can. It was decided that doctors and medical personnel may take whatever they need, since they likely need it more. You're a doctor too, as far as I know.
 So, I may take whatever I want?
 You may, if you're not afraid of the soot.
 All right.
 And no one is going to object?
 If you manage to help someone in the end, they might thank you instead.
 I see.
 I don't think this stuff is soot.
 What is it, then?
 Something contagious. Did anyone else stay behind, besides you?
 The townsfolk are running scared. The black stuff will dry a man's lungs in a second. I heard of several being dead already…
 I'm off to gather supplies. Maybe I can still find something useful.
 Take the paper. Black stuff or no black stuff, the house is mine now.
 It's miasma, not soot. Take the papers and go straight to the Theatre. There will be a hospital there soon.
 Mark Immortell
 …Is it my line now? Oh yes, you're right. Here I go: "Go back, my friend; the door is over there!"
 Out, you mean?
 How did I get here?
 Oh no, no. Wrong line. Let's try again: "I was dead."
 I was dead…
 So I wasn't completely dead…
 And then: "Death is never quick. Understanding is a process. Unpleasant, but unavoidable." \nWhat is but a moment for an external observer might feel like a day inside. Or a week. Or, if you're particularly unlucky, a year.
 Is this it? Can I go now?
 A week sounds fine.
 No. I'm not dead yet.
 Oh, but nothing is over yet. Although, it's in your interest to make sure your first death experience, henceforth simply "death," is also your last.
 Why?
 As a director of our theatre, I will now inform you of the most important pillar of your role. Silence in the audience!\nSo. With each death of a new actor, we will all face irreversible consequences. Got it? Irreversible!
 "Irreversible"?
 Any actor who continues Burakh's path in place of the previous Burakh will have it harder than their predecessor. Such is the theatre of cruelty.\nEach death makes the role harder. You will become burdened with the consequences of your predecessors' deaths… Their <i>negligence.</i>
 What sort of consequences?
 I don't want this role!
 I warned you. Each new attempt will be harder. When one actor dies, the next finds themselves even closer to the abyss.\nTry to finish this piece in one go. You personally, so that no one has to replace you. Have pity on your successor.
 I've no intention to die.
 I'll touch clocks more often from now on. Forewarned, forearmed.
 Unpleasant and painful. You won't be able to make a step without a drink of water—how's that? What about being unable to touch a close one? Or growing as weak as a five-year-old child?\nYour life force has already dwindled. And it will keep dwindling with each consequent death. Each and every one of them!
 This is absurd…
 That's fine. I don't fear challenges. They make it all the more engaging.
 
 
 
 
 
 Today, I need to lower the patients' pain. There are some painkillers in the hospital, but I'll need to obtain the rest myself.
 Done with my shift for today. Tomorrow the Fund will reward me, and new work will become available at the hospital.
 Today, the patients haven't been taken care of. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but there'll be more work at the hospital.
 Today's task is tough: I need to administer correct antibiotics to three patients. I'd better diagnose them with tinctures first.\n\nSome medicine is stocked in the hospital, but the rest I'll have to obtain myself.
 So you're Old Burakh's son?
 Yes.
 This district is locked down. Under Doctor Dankovsky's orders, these districts are off-limits to anyone but medical personnel. Are you that Vorakh guy?
 <i>Burakh.</i> He sure has memory issues, doesn't he?
 Well, I'm a doctor.
 Immunity boosters: two pills. Protective clothes: one unit. Here you go.
 Pills… pills are good.
 Protective clothes? Good idea. That area looks unclean. Very unclean…
 This district is infected. Listen carefully: I'll explain what you need in order to stay alive.
 Go ahead.
 Barley the Barber
 Hardhead
 Guard
 Stand still, yargachin. Can you hear it?
 Some sort of grumbling... or groaning? I do.
 Come closer. Stand in front of me. And wait.
 Wait for what?
 The Earth is breathing. Listen to it. Stand still and listen. The Earth, our Mother Boddho, is in pain... sobolon, yadaral... reveal her vein, and she will reward you. Embrace you. Return your mother's embrace.
 All right, I'm standing still.
 Who are you?
 Boleesh, boleesh, don't go! You're listening wrong.\nThe closer you are to a yadaral, a vein, the louder it is. The longer you listen, the more likely you are to split the soil open and reveal the vein. Stand still, don't move. Can you hear Mother Boddho sing? Come closer.
 You play odd games, basaghan.
 Sticky
 The alambic works, golden hands. Now let's review what it's for. Remember ulmars?
 Of course. It's a tincture made from herbs.
 Good. Now let's get down to curing people. What always comes first?
 Diagnostics.
 It is time for the most important part. Do you remember what a mete is?
 I do. It is one of the three Layers in a body.
 An ulmar of every color is linked to a specific Layer. Tell me how.
 It can only reveal the symptoms on that Layer.
 Now you know which Layer the illness is hiding on. It's time to administer antibiotics.
 A single one, right?
 How could you let it happen?
 Sorry… I'm too exhausted.
 I hear you now. Speak, but waste no breath.
 I remember you, tumbler toy. Used to pretend you were alive when I was little.
 Ah, my old friend. No one better to talk with than my own damn self.
 You're trying to mimic Father? Stop. His death hurts enough as it is.
 See… that wasn't so hard. Soon you will remember everything.\nYou'll make a great healer. A healer I'll be proud of.
 I'm so sorry you won't be around to see it, Father.
 Our mom has some sort of wicked disease, doctor. Can you give my li'l sister something to keep her safe? She's a frail one…\nThis September is truly foul…
 It is indeed.
 Will you teach me all this stuff? Mixing the herbs, choosing the right ones, all that…
 If you prove to be smart, I might.
 It'll take a while to figure out all these herbs. Didn't Old Burakh leave you any notes?
 I have a single letter left. Not a word about herbs in it, though.
 You know what I just remembered? Your old man once told me that the herbs suppress each other. Like in a circle.
 What do you mean, in a circle?
 I failed today's task. A patient died. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but there'll be more work at the hospital.
 I failed the task. Too many dead. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but new work will become available at the hospital.
 I need to perform autopsies for today's work. I need to put at least six organs into the ice box on the stage. Blood won't do.
 Done with my shift for today. Tomorrow the Fund will reward me, and new work will become available at the hospital.
 Today, I didn't complete my work at the hospital. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but new work will become available.
 
 
 
 
 
 Today, I need to find survivors among the piles of corpses and put them back in beds, where they can receive proper treatment.
 Done with my shift for today. Tomorrow the Fund will reward me, and new work will become available at the hospital.
 Today, the patients haven't been cared for. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but new work will become available at the hospital.
 I failed today's task. A patient died. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but there'll be more work at the hospital.
 All I need to do today is stay in the hospital for an hour without going out. Sounds simple enough…
 
 
 They were late, but did come after all!\n\nDone with my shift for today. Tomorrow the Fund will reward me, and new work will become available at the hospital.
 This is bullshit. I won't waste my time. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but new work will become available at the hospital.
 
 
 A doctor will always find work in a hospital. I should drop by here from time to time.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I wonder where Stakh is.
 No doctors or orderlies in the hospital… Only Clara the Changeling, who begs to cure a patient. As in, completely cure, not just treat.\n\nThis will require a shmowder, or a panacea.
 I fulfilled Clara's request and cured a patient. That was a kind deed. We'll see tomorrow it the Fund cares.
 I didn't fulfill Clara's plea. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow. The hospital stands almost empty…
 I didn't attend the hospital yesterday. New work will be available there in the morning.
 I didn't attend the hospital yesterday. New work will be available there in the morning.
 The hospital is closed.
 
 
 Rubin is tired. Dead tired. I can't help him with that. He'll either make it on his own… or not.
 Now, he would've said: "This place is our true home. One can work here."
 Even though I've never been here before.
 Yes. Home is where your work is.
 You can sleep here.
 I can store my things here. Not like I can carry everything around.
 You can perform operations here. And, of course, make medicines.
 …Without being disturbed by anyone.
 My bag is a bit small, that's true. Here I can fix that eventually.
 This is a good hideout. The door has a strong lock, and not many people know about this lair.
 …You were a true master. I'm not fit to fill your shoes.
 "Live here, Son. Live here and continue our work. This place is yours now. Here, you can do anything."
 Like speaking to my childhood toy.
 I know, tumbler toy. I know.
 "Here, you can do anything." That's exactly what he would have said.
 I hear you now. Speak, but waste no breath.
 I remember you, tumbler toy. Used to pretend you were alive when I was little.
 Ah, my old friend. No one better to talk with than my own damn self.
 You're trying to mimic Father? Stop. His death hurts enough as it is.
 And then he would've said: "This place is our true home. This is where we performed our work."
 Here you taught me the craft.
 Yes. Home is where your work is.
 You can sleep here.
 I can store my things here. Not like I can carry everything around.
 My bag is a bit small, that's true. Here I can fix that eventually.
 This is a good hideout. The door has a strong lock, and not many people know about this place.
 You can perform operations here. And, of course, make medicines.
 …Without being disturbed by anyone.
 …You were a true master. I'm not fit to fill your shoes.
 "Live here, Son. Live here and continue our work. This place is yours now. Here, you can do anything."
 Like speaking to my childhood toy.
 I know, tumbler toy. I know.
 "Here, you can do anything." That's exactly what he would have said.
 Correct. Tinctures are the foundation of every treatment. The Steppe has graced us with its wondrous herbs. Twyre, the queen of plants. Swevery. Ashen swish. White whip. Tell me, what's so good about them?
 They can uncover the symptoms of a disease.
 Uh… They have astringent properties, I believe… and thus improve immunity. Properly prepared, a good tincture is a powerful booster.
 Correct. They reveal the symptoms of a disease and improve immunity. How would you make a tincture?
 With clear water. No ethanol. Steppe herbs are too delicate.
 I need to combine any two different herbs. This way, a link will form.
 Unente: Clear water and two different herbs. You can find both here, look in the cabinet. Make a single ulmar for a start.
 All right.
 Be khara, this place is well stocked. You've always been thrifty, old man.
 Just don't let your mother get close to her while she's sick.
 Our place is cramped. We can't make her sleep in the street, can we?
 Fair enough.
 Let's take a look at your sister…
 Father taught me when I was your age, so why not?
 I just fixed it, didn't you notice?
 Hello? Anyone in there? Can you hear me?\nFor a moment, you just stood there… feeling bad, maybe? The air's thick here in September; breathe in too deep and you'll pass out.
 I was just remembering Father.
 I'm fine, you little familiar. And healthy. And I don't pass out.
 We need to determine which Layer hides the sickness.
 An examination.
 Correct again. But you are forgetting something. Pain. \nPain is our great ally. It reminds us we're still alive. It drives us to action. However, when a patient is in unbearable pain, we cannot uncover which Layer has come out of balance.
 Of course. We must keep the pain in check.
 Not to mention that using ulmars hurts the patient as well.
 Don't get smart with me, boy. We'll get to ulmars soon enough. For now, get to work. Relieve his pain.
 I'm not being smart. Just grumpy.
 You're better off without preparing ulmars that relieve pain. That knowledge is taboo. Stick to morphine and you'll be fine. Any medicine is fine if it lets you avoid making cuts.
 I'll stick to morphine.
 It was you who sent me to study clinical medicine. Things are done differently there.
 I'm not cutting anyone yet, am I?
 Don't worry. We have time.
 They are bones, nerves, and flesh. This has always struck me as strange—what about blood and internal organs? And why aren't bones the deepest Layer?
 I told you time and again that triangular plots ruin imagination. I also told you that our ancestors perceived the world as a single whole, and treasured its many links and connections. Respect the clarity of thought they possessed. \nWhat is the most important part in your knowledge of the Layers?
 Any disease always hides within one of the three. At first, at least.
 Remind me.
 A body is governed by three Layers. Whatever illness grips the body turns this harmony into a conflict between them, and thus kills. Look inside a body, and you shall see. \nThese Layers are called "mete."
 So, which parts of the body do they refer to?
 In different times different people have named different parts. Don't waste your time with the clinical approach. Folk medicine requires a different worldview.
 Why?
 How do the ulmars and different herbs correspond to these Layers? 
 Every combination of herbs is linked to a single Layer.
 I remember now.
 Very well. Let's get back to healing.
 Knowing the exact nature of an illness is not necessary for healing. Affecting the correct Layer, however, can bring a patient back to normal.
 You can link them to colors for mnemonics. White, yellow, rusty.
 An ulmar can only reveal symptoms of the Layer of the same color.
 Let's say you're making an ulmar from two herbs. How do you know which color you will get?
 One of the herbs decides.
 How am I supposed to remember all the properties of all the herbs?
 If memory fails you, there is nothing I can do to help. You're talking to yourself, remember?
 I remember.
 You will learn the properties of herbs in due time. Only this way will you understand how things are connected. Grab more herbs and water. Prepare an ulmar of every color. Go in blind for now, and the herbs will reveal themselves to you. \nTry again and again. That is how you'll learn to link things together.
 Three tinctures. One of each color. I'll try.
 I know, I know. No one can teach me now, so I'll have to learn it all myself.
 I got carried away. For a moment, I thought I could really hear your voice, Father.
 Yes. You can only administer a single one. Antibiotics are harmful, as you know. \nYou'll learn to make your own, but later. For now, you can use pills. There should be a stash around here somewhere. Choose the correct one.
 I know.
 Of which there are three kinds, as well.
 That's true.
 I shouldn't give too many at once... Too big of a risk.
 Now there's no room for mistakes left.
 I knew that was the wrong antibiotic. I also remember it's all in my head. It's just medical humor. Don't worry, Dad.
 It is hard. But I'm not afraid of hard work.
 All right… Goodbye, tumbler. Playtime is over. Time to get to business.
 A store-bought cure, or tincture brewed from herbs, would help them stay alive another day.
 Lucky me. I happen to have some.
 I think I was given some… but I've used them.
 The doctor saves himself to save the flock. That's wise. Take this, and give it to the patient.
 Thanks.
 Near-human, you must act. These doll cocoons may one day become real, and need your help.
 Thanks.
 Correct. However, there is a catch. What do you think it is?
 Symptoms can be misleading.
 A single symptom may be connected to several Layers at once.
 One can't always immediately uncover the symptom that pinpoints a single Layer as the one out of balance.
 Yes. Your job is to eliminate all the wrong possibilities.
 Yet every single tincture I give the patient hurts them.
 That is so. You have to keep an eye out for pain levels. \nIt is time to act, Son. Uncover the symptoms. Determine which Layer is out of balance. Do your best to use as few ulmars as possible. You have everything you need.
 I'll be observant.
 I'll be careful.
 No, they don't. Any one herb can be mixed with any other.
 Blood twyre dampens the black. Black twyre beats the brown. And the brown drowns the bloody, I guess.
 Huh. I can work with that.
 You know, I'm starting to remember this, too.
 All done. Tomorrow the Fund will reward me, and new work will become available at the hospital.
 Today, the patients haven't been taken care of. The Fund will not reward me tomorrow, but there'll be more work at the hospital.
 I've got bad news.
 Could it get any worse…?
 Well?
 Someone sharing your features spilled blood. It became known. People want revenge.\nThey say that whoever murdered the three men at the Station today is also responsible for Simon Kain's death.
 Yeah? What else are they responsible for?
 What else? You won't like it.\nThe townsfolk realized murder's no longer taboo. People sensed they can now kill others.\nFirst, they looked for a shabnak-adyg and killed several women. Then, they went after the steppe creatures, odonghs. They're frightened. They turned to animals.
 What does this have to do with me?
 You have nothing to do with it, I know. I'm a ferryman. Well… Almost. Actually, I'm a train driver. I know you were on my train.
 I wasn't alone, by the way…
 But you were. We drivers can feel the living weight. There was only one human being on that train. You.
 Odd.
 It was self-defense. I had to draw a knife.
 Draw a knife? Bad idea. Nothing is worse than cutting a body. You think if your father was allowed to, so are you? You are not him.
 Actually, I'm a surgeon too, now. That's why I went away, to study.
 Hm. I had suspected it was just a dream…
 The townsfolk aren't too fond of ferrymen and drivers. So we will help you.\nGo to a quay, show your face to a Worm, and he'll take you wherever you ask for a fingernail. Show your face to a man, and he'll help you out with equipment.
 Thank you.
 I have a fingernail already.
 I know.
 So they seek to punish murder by turning to murder themselves?
 …Have there been many victims?
 Yes. But you're too filled with your own grief now to care.
 Fair enough.
 You're wrong.
 It's like a craze. It's September, you know. Steppe herbs are in bloom…
 Yeah, right. <i>Of course</i> the herbs are to blame.
 Unbelievable.
 And you are…?
 A ferryman.
 What do you want?
 Different combinations of herbs will reveal different symptoms. However, all tinctures boost immunity. This effect comes from the soil, not from the herbs themselves.
 Today is Meat Day, tangher. We feast on meat.
 What are you celebrating, Khatangher?
 Khatanghe brought meat this morning. Said a warehouse door was left unlocked. So we took some.\nBoös Vlad grows fatter by the day. He works, he takes the profit. So we've decided to take the meat, at least.
 Is it at least fresh?
 She must be offended… or ashamed? She's free to go, we told her, but she refuses.\nI'll have you know, we were respectful! We only checked her legs. It's mandatory. And she had normal human legs. So, free to go now! Yet there she stands.
 You checked her legs? What for?
 Neither clay nor bone. She's a normal living girl, not a shabnak. And so, she's free to go.\nYet she doesn't… She must be offended. The steppe people have odd morals. They don't fear death, they refuse to cut a body, and are ashamed of strange things.
 What shabnak?
 An extinct creature, now. What were you planning on asking?
 Tumbler Human
 I've already made them.
 Yamar berkhe, yargachin. He who knows how to dissect people, can dissect Earth. Sayntadaa, emshen... Now partake of my blood. Let my blood feed the earth.
 Everyone knows how it works. You quench Earth's thirst with blood; you reap its harvest. Try it.
 I do have blood already though. I don't need yours.
 What for?
 Twyrine uncovers that which is hidden. Every sip will reveal a secret event or location to me.
 
 There are ferrymen in the town. They're waiting for me.
 Watch the herbs grow. Listen to them sing. You'll find them by the song, by the sound. Mother Boddho reveals herself to the generous.\nCome back tomorrow, khayaala. Feed her more blood, reap more herbs.
 Bayartay, basaghan.
 Generosity bears generosity, huh...
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I can boost someone's immunity with tinctures and store-bought pills.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whistler
 Ferrymen can help in a difficult situation.
 
 
 
 I made tinctures of all three colors. Time for diagnostics.
 
 
 
 
 A tincture is a mixture of water and herbs.
 
 Tinctures are brewed from various herbs: twyre, swevery, ashen swish, and white whip.
 
 
 
 
 Tinctures hurt patients. When they're in too much pain, I can't figure out which of their Layers is sick.
 Morphine can relieve a patient's pain.
 Three types of medicine are used to heal people: tinctures, painkillers, and antibiotics.
 Antibiotics lower the level of infection.
 Knowing the precise strain of the disease, I can give the patient the correct antibiotic.
 Father used to practice steppe medicine. Time to follow in his footsteps.
 Menkhu Knowledge
 I need to make one tincture of each color.
 Now I can cure people with tinctures and store-bought medicine.
 
 
 Hey, Gubar! The doctor's here, our shift's over.
 Who are you?
 You are indeed relieved for now.
 Grigory Gorky, Orderly #6. Even number, unfortunately.\nMy partner, Avrely Gubar, is luckier.
 How so?
 You're both alive—so you're equally lucky.
 Exactly. Death follows even numbers, didn't you know?\nWe've been keeping tabs on this statistic for a while now. Wherever there's a two, there's the grim reaper.
 Curious… Any explanation for this?
 I'll add it to my collection of superstitions.
 It's 'cause suffering tears the soul in two! And death keeps an eye on such moments.\nPah! But that's all just poetry. What I'm saying is, where there's an even number, someone dies. Even numbers are just unlucky.
 Okay. What's today's job?
 To check this exact theory. But you ain't in danger, doctor, 'cause you're the one and only! And death avoids ones. It's afraid to prick its finger on 'em.\nAll in all, you just gotta wait here for an hour until you're relieved.
 An hour?
 You got enough medicine? Any protective clothing? Even a piece of cloth would do.\nThe air here is thick; breathing it is like eating infection with a spoon. A really big one.
 I have everything I need.
 Wait a bit. I'll resupply and come back here.
 Good.\nWe won't lock the door, out of respect. Resolve is only heroic as long as there was a choice. But doctor Burakh is not the type to run away. Are you?
 I'm not.
 Watch your tone.
 ...Oops. My deepest apologies. That was merely a polite turn of phrase.\nOur shift is over, so we can't wait here anymore. We don't make the rules. So we're leaving. The rest is up to you: either wait for an hour or scurry out the door... failing is an option too, after all.
 I'll be quick.
 Orderly
 
 Clara
 Orderly
 I can't do it… I can't do anything!
 What are you doing here?
 I wanted to convince the general… He was the only one who believed me! He did! Don't you see? Just him! His officers looked at him as though he'd become a different person. As though talking to me stained him somehow…\nBut he did! And I wanted to prove… to show I have a healing touch.
 But in truth, you don't?
 I do… But something's wrong with me today. It doesn't work!
 So you've promised your general you'll cure someone? Get rid of the plague completely?
 Did it… really work before?
 Really?\nI only need to cure a single person… Just a single one!
 Really. I have a cure.
 But that would be a trick. You won't actually be the one doing the healing. Is that fine by you? I thought you were so righteous.
 A trick… Tricking others is wrong. For me, anyway.\nBut giving them hope is more important. Showing that there is a salvation. And if that means I have to sin, well… it's… it's all right, I guess. Their souls are more important than mine.
 Give hope to whom? That commander of yours? Or his officers?
 Don't sin, then. Tell them the truth: there is a salvation, and it's in Doctor Burakh's hands.
 No! These poor souls… Even if only one gets better, the rest will hope, and cling to life, and thus endure and survive.\nPeople only die when they resign themselves and give up. Didn't you know?
 Fine. I'll help.
 What will you treat him with?
 You won't like it. A children's "shmowder."
 A panacea. That's what people call it. I made it myself.
 I've got nothing on me right now, but I'll find a healing item for him. You stay here and try your method again.
 Of course!
 So you've promised your general you'll cure someone? Get rid of the plague completely?
 
 
 Greetings, Doctor Burakh. I came to relieve you of your duty.
 I don't eat other people's meat.
 This person lives, but mortal peril looms. The sand pest chokes their district, floods the streets.
 I can see that.
 Immunity protects each person here. Some have a long one; others, but a short. The span of one's is long; another's, short.
 …What? I never thought immunity could be measured in centimeters.
 As long as people stay indoors, they're not in danger.
 Walls <i>can</i> protect—but people still breathe air. The window sashes aren't the most secure. Some mice and bugs creep in to houses, too. And no one knows just how the plague is spread.
 Yeah. We should do everything we can to find that out.
 Isn't it kind of rude to talk about her in the third person like she can't hear you?
 She is one person; you are another. And I, the third, must speak this way. But <i>are</i> we people, all of us, you think? 
 Fair enough.
 A dice roll makes a clearer picture, sir: At midnight, Death will roll his dice to see if he rolls high, this one will perish; if he rolls low, they live one day more. Your part, Burakh, is but to adjust the odds.
 To the maximum?
 To some degree. If the dice has six sides, you can at times be guaranteed a five. As in—Death always has a chance to win with six. But even Death can't guarantee a six.
 It can't always, but it often does.
 …By raising their immunity, yes. I'm not completely clueless, you know.
 I know, Reflection. You don't need to explain further.
 I've heard that Death prefers chess.
 You are a doctor—<i>surgeon!</i>—stick with dice! Since you have means to cheat, and Death does not.
 I'm no good at cheating…
 I can cheat? Teach me, then, master gambler.
 This person weakly rolls a die, the way someone who's barely human would. They can't roll higher than a three without some help. And truth be told, they'll likely roll a one. \nSo you come here and turn the die just so, so that a larger number faces up.
 Huh…
 That sounds a bit… hopeless.
 Couldn't <i>you</i> have just given it to the patient? Why do you even need me?
 Because you are a doctor, and because they do not have your knowledge or your skills. You are two-thirds a person—they are half.
 You sure do love arithmetic.
 They're not dolls. They're people just like me.
 An emergency at the Factory, I guess… And now there's some sort of poisonous soot in the air. That's what people say.
 We'll see… what soot it is.
 I don't think so. I'm afraid it's worse.
 But isn't… Isn't this what happened in the Crude Sprawl five years ago? They cordoned off the district back then, too!
 I don't know. I wasn't in town then.
 Possibly. So it would be wiser of you to leave.
 Who are you?
 I'm an orderly. We wear these costumes on Bachelor Dankovsky's orders. They're easy to notice from afar and protect from infected particles… Maybe. Sometimes. A bit.\nI'd rather not check personally, unless they order me to delve in.
 Got it. Go on.
 If you're common medical personnel, how do you know anything about this disease? No one even knows what it is.
 I had a nap by Mistress Katerina's window. Saw a prophetic dream. Satisfied?
 Sure. The abilities of Mistresses are no laughing matter.
 Well, if there's no better explanation.
 Immunity is your armor. It gets thinner each time you contract the disease. So it would do you good to keep an eye on it. Take pills… You know the drill.
 But it's not healthy to take too many pills.
 I have my own immunity boosters, handcrafted.
 Infected air lowers your immunity. Slowly, but constantly, simply because you're breathing it in. But that's not the worst part.
 What is?
 An infected person's touch, or touching infected surfaces, like doorknobs or drawers.\nAlso… Sometimes it feels like the pest… breathes on you.
 Breathes? How?
 I'm not a doctor, Master Burakh. I'm a common orderly, scared witless. I'm only describing a dream I had.\nBut this pest… it's like it's alive. It speaks. Breathes. And woe, if it breathes on you.
 I'll keep it in mind.
 Why is it always about prophetic dreams in this town!
 Anyway. All <i>those</i> touches melt your immunity worse than air; like a hot knife through butter.\nThen there's a… tumor.
 A tumor? Like a cancerous growth?
 One can drink from barrels and water pumps—instead of the polluted Gorkhon.
 Who's that over there? Limp along, hobo. This house is ours. Get your loot elsewhere. Lotta free houses still standin'.
 This is my house.
 No, it ain't. It's ours. Objections?
 Yes, I object.
 Are there many of you?
 Hey, noukherne! Be khara, you are a good man. Buy my bull.
 Bayarlaa, noukherne. How much do you want for it?
 Father's house is being robbed!
 
 
 From now on, a public Fund will reward doctors for medical work. There's even talk of an advance payment.
 Would you look at that…
 What's going on there?
 …So that's the nightmare I had. Can you imagine? Just before I woke up, I told him, "Be on your way then, khayaala! People don't kill people."\nWhat do you want, old man?
 …What are you doing here?
 Where do you think you're going? Can't you see it's locked?
 What's going on here?
 Why?
 None of our business. And none of yours. The orders are not to let anyone in.
 Watch your tongue, tough guy.
 I've barely any cover left, see? That means I am almost one with the Earth now. I speak to you in her name. Be khara, you've forgotten everything, yargachin.
 Why are you standing here, basaghan?
 Are you harassing this woman, scum?
 And who are you?
 God forbid. We treated her with utmost respect.\nWhy call us "scum"? We ain't no crazed mob, we're on duty here. See the leather cap? We belong to the House.
 What house?
 "On duty"? But we never had any kinds of patrolmen here.
 We are the Saburovs' people. \nEach of the three houses assigned someone to look for the monster. The Olgimskys. The Kains, of course. And, obviously, the Saburovs. The latter being us.\nAnd who might you be, good sir?
 What monster?
 I'm Isidor Burakh's son. I've returned home after six years.
 Oh… Send my regards to your father. A most respectable man! He dragged my daughter from beyond the grave. And we almost gave up on her!\nYou tell him that. Tell him that Peter the Nightjar sends his fondest regards.
 I will.
 I'm not the person you're looking for.
 Will you stop hovering over the girl? You won't comfort her, you're only making it worse! Just go.
 A shabnak… A creature of steppe legends. They say Earth disgorges it. And then it steals a woman's form and goes around murdering folks.\nIt's all silly, of course. But we have an order to check… So we do.
 Who ordered this?
 Does anyone actually believe these old wives' tales?
 Oh, so you're an outsider, then? You see all kinds of things around here. The Earth here is special… It breathes.
 All right. And who are you?
 A steppe creature, a golem, a clay wench. It steals a woman's shape. But its legs remain clay or bone, so that's how you can tell.
 Bone or clay, right. I remember the tale.
 Good hunting, folks. At least you're not having to look for ghosts, or domovye. For now.
 For them. For us, today is Meat Day.
 Be khara. I see that.
 Just today? No, I know this town. Every day celebrates meat.
 Khayaala? I think it's a fasting period now… Good folks don't eat meat, not until winter.
 It's cured, kholboön. Who would keep fresh meat in a warehouse?\nAnd if you need to drink, the water is next to the Factory wall, see? Barrel water is the best, brought from the steppe. But in a pinch, you can drink this, too.
 All right. Show me the meat.
 So there's a water pump there now? All right, I'll use it. 
 But it's good.
 It's stolen.
 I'm listening.
 That's where the bodies are taken.
 What bodies?
 Of today's victims. Accidental victims…
 What do you mean?
 The autumn is foul this year. People have gone mad. That's what I mean.
 I don't understand…
 I feel like I've seen you before…
 What do you mean? We've never seen a dead person before. Have you?
 Yes.
 Be on your way then, khayaala. Why poke your nose around?
 Fair enough.
 Yes. I'm a doctor.
 You be on your way, mutts.
 Nightjar
 Got it.
 I see.
 Onlooker
 Doghead
 Big Sister
 Usher
 The Tower, my precious Tower… The locals call her "the Polyhedron", referring to her as "it," as if she were inanimate. But for me, she is alive and female, and I can't abandon her. \nI have to gaze upon her again and again… to convince myself she exists.
 So it was you who thought up that thing? Peter Stamatin…
 You stink of booze, and your hands are shaking. You drink a lot, don't you?
 The Judge? What does he want with me? I will never build another one… No one ever will.
 What are you talking about?
 A lot. I have to quit drinking, but I don't have any willpower left.
 Why?
 There must be a reason, don't you think? But you're a doctor, not a priest. My memory is faulty, true, but I don't remember us being friends. \nTell me, what do you want? I'm not looking for company.
 As you wish.
 I am considered responsible for her creation… but I'm not God to completely defy gravity. It's… happenstance. Such a tower shouldn't be. It breaks the laws of physics. Laws of optics as well. Just a coincidence.
 Such things are never coincidences.
 Listen, what's your name?
 Artemy Burakh.
 How does it stand?
 So, it was you who designed that… thing on the opposite bank?
 That's what I'm pondering right now: How does she stand, indeed? Like a rose on its stem…
 This is an interesting chat, architect. We should talk more later.
 Whatever. This is not why I am here.
 Usually people call me "Help, I'm dying!"
 Doesn't matter.
 Why have you come?
 Prophylaxis. You're in a plagued district.
 To give you something better than twyrine.
 Just wanted to meet you.
 Listen, doctor… You should check on Anna, too. She's a circus artist who lives nearby. She's mysophobic—I'm worried she might lose it completely, these days. She's an interesting one. Be a pity if she died or went nuts.
 A mysophobic circus artist? Now that's something.
 I'll check on her. It's my job.
 That girl? "Interesting" is an understatement. Her nerves sure could use treatment.
 What is it with you artists always being so difficult? First Peter, now you…
 Are your hands clean?
 They are.
 I'm not going to touch you! Stop yelling.
 You've touched the doorknob!
 So what?
 My hands are covered in blood, so quit fooling around, little lady.
 What? Blood? What do you mean, covered in blood? Just stay away…
 I'm joking.
 I'm speaking figuratively.
 I am wearing gloves.
 Microbes are transmitted with touch. They stay on the skin. Evil is transmitted with touch too, and it stays on the skin. <i>Fate</i> is transmitted with touch. \nAll this dirt changes you, killing you slowly… This is so repulsive!
 Calm down, please.
 I'm a doctor. Microbes run from me like the devil from a holy flame.
 Are you drunk, too?
 I don't want to even think about it! Everyone is prattling about that toxic soot from the Factory! It's out there, behind the windows, everywhere… \nAll this dirt and grime… It's a punishment, that's what it is! It's all about those damned children!
 You're a circus artist, all right.
 You'll have to trust me if you want to survive this.
 What?
 Look me in the eyes and listen to me. I'm going to give you medicine to protect you from microbes. Do you understand me?
 I'm a doctor, making my rounds. Do as I tell you. There is an epidemic in town.
 An epidemic… Oh God. An epidemic. What? Plague? All my fault, my punishment…
 Not the plague. Something far worse.
 What kind of crime could condemn an entire town along with you?
 You're too full of yourself.
 Are you a real medic? You really can help me? So I wouldn't… Just don't touch me!
 A real one. Trust me.
 I can't avoid touching you. Don't fret. Drink this.
 Just stay indoors. Your nerves won't survive a trip outside, circus girl.
 What a lout… Have you checked up on my brother yet?
 I have. I took care of him.
 I'm going there soon.
 Take good care of my brother, doctor. If I kick the bucket, so be it. But my brother must survive. He is a genius.
 And you're not?
 Sure am. Have you seen the Dancing Bridge in the Capital?
 Never been there.
 I don't like your attitude, architect.
 You built that?
 That's right. And the Polyhedron? What do you think?
 It looks like an abscess.
 Herb Bride
 Crow
 Crow
 Khatangher
 
 
 Tinctures require clean water from barrels or fountains.
 I made tinctures of two different colors. Only one more to grasp.
 Odongh
 If you see a man, run. They're angry today. They kill the likes of you and I.
 You think we've got anything in common, odongh?
 Why are they so hateful?
 We aren't human. We're different.
 Well, you're a Worm. But I'm human.
 Unfortunately, I'm made of flesh and blood, so I'll take that advice.
 Seeking a murderer. Becoming murderers themselves. This is how a town changes.
 What murderer? What's that got to do with me?
 I'll be cautious.
 But the earth doesn't.
 You look like a murderer. Don't delve into the Town's flesh if you want to live. Keep to the outskirts. Fewer people here.
 Thanks, Worm. May Mother Boddho keep your footprints warm.
 I can't. My business is at the Town's heart.
 See that man there, up ahead? Neither of us could beat him on our own. I'm weak today.
 We could both attack him.
 I am too.
 I'll risk it.
 Yes. You and I are weak. He's strong. Neither of us would win alone. But together, maybe we can.
 Let's try.
 Forget it. I'll try to sneak by him. Maybe he won't see me.
 Don't even think about it. You're wounded. You're bad at fighting up-close. You'd probably die.
 You think?
 So be it.
 When it comes crashing down, it will bombard the Stone Yard with debris.
 It's one of yours too, I gather. How did you even come up with something like that?
 Don't fret, it's not going to collapse any time soon. It's held for five years, and will survive at least five hundred more.
 How does the ground even support something so large?
 One must be able to think boldly. The ground is nothing but dirt. Nothing but soil hiding rotting corpses. It's the realm of the dead. \nWe've always wanted to create something that the earth cannot touch, cannot defile in any way.
 I've always considered Earth to be the source of life.
 I just don't understand you idealistic maniacs.
 You should stay inside. Just to be safe.
 I am the battering ram that clears his path. Me and him are perfect twins.
 All in all, you seem healthy. The judge will be pleased.
 The local climate is good for twins.
 Why would I want a bull?
 It's as good as free. Three hundred.
 Cheap indeed. Is it stolen?
 It's not just any bull. It brings luck. When the time comes, it'll tell you what to do.
 Can it talk then?
 You offend me, Khatangher. Not stolen; it's just that money is needed more than bulls these days.
 How come?
 Forget bulls! Be khara, you could sell air.
 Unente, it is known: it will talk on the scariest day of your life, showing you the right way.\nEh, kharaldaa, I'd rather not have it at all. Perhaps there won't be a scary day in my life, then.
 That's funny logic, like you believe your own tall tale. The scary day will come if you have a bull or not. It's not his life, but yours.
 To be honest, I think you're just a swindler, noukherne.
 Take him for two hundred. It's a good bull. Be khara, it'll be useful to you.
 You're out of your mind, Khatangher. Find yourself another fool.
 So you're selling a curse on four legs? Great. I'll take if from you if <i>you</i> pay <i>me.</i>
 I don't even have a place to keep it.
 I don't have that much.
 Pay me now, and I'll bring it to your place later. There'll come a day when you'll be grateful to me!
 You mean the scariest day of my life? Nah, not interested.
 That was funny, khayaala. Go sell your bull to Big Vlad. He has a lot of money.
 Fine. Here's the money. We'll see if you keep your word.
 Bountiful harvest?
 Huh?
 Brown twyre costs three times as much today.
 I see.
 Oh… I thought you were an herbalist, here to sell herbs.
 Do you buy twyre?
 We've only got two weeks until September ends. We're now in the golden time of harvest. We need to stock up for the whole year ahead…
 How much do you pay?
 Ashen swish is more expensive today.
 Swish is a sinister herb. Its steppe name is Bardo Suok, "the darkness of the depths." But no matter…
 Odongh
 If you see a man, run. Men are angry today. They kill the likes of you and I.
 You think we have anything in common, odongh?
 Why are they so hateful?
 We're not human. We're different.
 You're a worm, true. But I am human all right.
 Unfortunately, I am made of flesh and blood. So I'll take your advice.
 Looking for a murderer. Turning into murderers themselves. This is how a town changes.
 What murderer? What does it have to do with me?
 I'll be cautious.
 But the earth doesn't.
 You look like a murderer. Do not delve into the town's flesh in you want to live. Keep to the outskirts. Less people here.
 Thanks, Worm. Let Mother Boddho keep your footprints warm.
 I can't. I have business at the heart of the town.
 It was an accident, I swear… She was trying to get out, not fall down. She held so tight...
 Out? Why not use the gate then?
 The Termitary got locked in, didn't you know? Olgimsky's orders. Rumor has it, the workers were on a strike.
 A strike? Finally.
 Are you Burakh? Your father's house is being robbed. Right now.
 By whom?
 Hey, kharaldaa... I didn't do anything.
 Be khara, you can protect yourself.
 You shouldn't look either.
 What do you have here?
 How do you know?
 How should I know? I only looked from the outside. Even then, I barely got out of there alive. Got cut with a razor, see? And it could have been even worse.
 Who did this to you?
 People have turned to looting—didn't you know? Houses are being burgled all over the Hindquarters, in the Tanners, in the Skinners. The plague has abandoned those districts. \nEmpty houses, open for thieves. So people barge in—and no one punishes them, no one even frowns! Guess we all have too many other concerns these days…
 What about our new patrolmen? Aren't they doing… something?
 Seen it myself.
 Are there many of them?
 They guard infected districts. Saburov said that's more important than looting. So, are you going?
 I see. I am.
 Will you come with me?
 No. I respect you, but I won't ever return there. That place is beyond the law now.
 Fine. Thanks for the warning.
 Got any weapons? Without 'em that place is… inhospitable.
 I'll be fine.
 I don't need weapons to deal with bandits.
 Let me see.
 Relax, I'll live. You hurry home!
 What is even the point of robbing it…
 The plague has left there? Impossible…
 And yet it's true. The air is clear. There's no infection there.
 Huh…
 Why did they run away?
 I don't know. They behaved so strange…
 What are you doing here, basaghan?
 I brought my bones here.
 Why?
 Are you… kissing the skull?
 I'm not kissing it. It was in my hands, then people ran in. I was embarrassed and hid my face.
 But you haven't done anything wrong. Why were you ashamed?
 I won't explain to you. I did nothing wrong. I just brought my bones here. What's wrong with that? These bones are mine, I didn't steal them! I tell the truth.
 Well, sure… Nothing wrong about any of this.
 You should be more careful with your bones, basaghan. You're acting strange. And people rarely appreciate that.
 What's so strange about that? They're the strange ones.
 Well… People don't usually toy around with bull skulls.
 Come to think of it, it isn't. So go ahead and do whatever you want, as long as it doesn't hurt anyone.
 It will not.
 I believe you, basaghan.
 But I still think you should leave. They might return.
 Your brother disagrees.
 Ah… You spoke to him, didn't you? How is he? Why even ask, though… My brother is a tough man. He can overcome any hardship.
 Your brother is alive and well.
 He is… a keen one.
 All of us could use some treatment in that regard. Can you do that?
 I can. I can do everything.
 I specialize in another field.
 Maybe.
 Great job. Have a drink on me, then.
 You know I'm not some handyman you have to bribe with booze?
 Keep it. The alcohol should keep the microbes at bay.
 Give me the bottle, and keep your compliments.
 I've already visited Peter.
 I've spoken to Andrey just recently. He is safe.
 I need both alive and well. Those two are a single creature. Each one of them is stunted without the other.
 Very well.
 You needn't worry, Judge. The brothers are safe.
 You're a good doctor, Burakh. You've returned home at an evil hour, but still in time.
 I should have returned earlier. That way we'd still have the best doctor we could hope for.
 Thank you for your kind words, Judge. Only time will tell how good a doctor I really am.
 Why? Is there a fire or something?
 Still… Why not use the window on a lower floor?
 People are like sunflower seeds to Big Vlad. He extracts their lifeblood like oil. They've had enough, they've had it with working both day <i>and</i> night shifts so often.\nSo he locked them in, to keep it contained… to protect the Town. Or we'd have a riot…
 A third of the Town works for the Bull Enterprise. Are they <i>all</i> inside?
 Like beasts in a cage.
 It doesn't bode well.
 That's 'cause the workers are on the edge! They're steppe people, not animals! They also have feelings, they too want to live… but it gets worse for them by the year.
 Worse?
 A strike seems… uncharacteristic for them.
 Huh.
 
 
 Why are you leaving? Aren't they waiting for you in the Town?
 They are.
 Who are you?
 I'm curious what's out there.
 Go back to the Town, Artemy Burakh. The steppe will call for you. Maybe even tomorrow. But now you're needed home. You've nothing to do here yet.
 Don't tell me what to do. It's up to me.
 You're right… I'll return here later.
 All I want is some quiet and emptiness.
 A reflection.
 What do you want, reflection?
 Do you think the steppe's changed over the six years that you haven't been here? This earth is alive still; even a thousand years is but a moment to her.
 Happy to hear that.
 Who knows…
 Doctor Burakh, right? Here's your allowance for today.
 What allowance?
 I expected more.
 Yesterday the rulers have established the Fund for Outbreak Control. Until the centralized workings of the Town's institutions can be restored, every acting doctor will receive a daily allowance. The size of this allowance depends on the end results of your deeds. \nToday's portion is your advance.
 What kind of deeds are we talking about here?
 What a great opportunity to evaluate my skills.
 Who exactly will be judging my results?
 First off, you have to attend the hospital every day. It is housed in the building of the Theatre.
 I know.
 A nice touch.
 I am just the messenger here. Such are the rules the rulers have decided upon.\nThe money you receive is a budget for buying medicine and other supplies you'll need for working with the infection. This system should last us until a centralized distribution system gets arranged.
 So what is expected of me?
 Hospital attendance is mandatory and should be your highest priority. If you fail to complete your daily assignment, the Fund will deny you any payment for that day, including rewards for other activities.
 Activities such as…?
 Mother of god… This is one of Dankovsky's bright ideas, isn't it?
 Helping the infected in the streets. \nThe ones stumbling around are beyond salvation, but if you see someone lying on the ground and shuddering, consider giving them a pill. Even a wrong antibiotic helps somewhat.
 I have no instructions on this matter.
 One less problem for me to worry about.
 I wasn't present at yesterday's council. As far as I know, Doctor Dankovsky and you are subsidized from the Fund exactly the same.
 That's nice to know. What other activities get rewarded?
 Are you sure it will get arranged?
 It's hard to say. The Town is experiencing an economic crisis. On top of the plague, the supply train is late. And we can't simply seize the items we need from shops at the moment.
 Got it. What's my job in all this?
 Last but not least. The heads of the families—the Kains in particular—understand that the situation might require you to go beyond the norms of the law.\nBe warned, however: Your good name across town will also be taken into account when calculating your daily allowance.
 It couldn't be easy, could it?
 All right. Where do I sign?
 Take the money, it's in the cabinet. The final score is tallied at midnight, so the subsidy for yesterday will wait for you from midnight on. The Fund works round the clock, so don't be shy.
 Good for you.
 All right, register man. Anything else?
 That must be why you sound like a talking cash register…
 Got it. You produce twyrine here, then?
 It's different every day. Depends on what we're currently brewing. Some herbs may cost triple sometimes.
 I see.
 We're not just interested in twyre. Ashen swish, swevery, and white whip are all, of course, more rare… So, more expensive.
 You value time, huh?
 I'll keep it in mind.
 Are herbs plentiful this year?
 Quite. The Brides must have done a great job.
 And just in time, too…
 You mean dancing?
 Sometimes, when I go out into the steppe, I see dozens of them stepping around, swaying. Beautiful…
 Beautiful, indeed.
 I don't like them. They've got a creepy vibe.
 Be careful with it. It only takes one swish to see someone's head roll.
 Swevery costs more today.
 What do you even make from it? It's as bitter as bile.
 I'd give even more for it.
 Today, people want white whip. We'll pay extra.
 Do you even know where it grows?
 You people are odd…
 Blood twyre costs three times as much today.
 Lucky me.
 Blood twyre produces bad twyrine. Makes a person forget themselves.
 Today, the special offer is black twyre.
 My favorite.
 All right…
 So you're Isidor's son, huh?
 
 
 I am.
 Isidor could make special potions. Cures for any diseases.
 Except dirty conscience.
 Most importantly, I'll never ask you where you got the human organs needed to make these potions. But they make brilliant antibiotics. Today, we buy them at a special price.
 You're a sly guy.
 Do you have any of his stock left?
 Yes.
 I can craft them myself.
 I'd pay good money for them.
 Lucky me.
 Just keep me in mind.
 I'll find a better use for them.
 Money is worthless now.
 None of them was a panacea.
 I will.
 Today we need potions that reduce pain.
 I see.
 Pain is crucial for self-improvement.
 Did you know my father?
 Everyone did. He was a real man.
 He was.
 Fine. I see you're not the talkative type.
 
 I saw you several times before. When you were a child, my brother Simon was close to your father. One could say they were friends.
 So, I gather you already know why I'm here?
 I am.
 Greetings, Judge.
 About the house. Now, after I've seen you with my own eyes, I relinquish all claims I have on your property. The house is yours.
 That's all it took…?
 I'm going to write a decree. Pass it to the prefect of the Hindquarters district. Today, of course.
 Thank you, Judge.
 Why did you want our house in the first place?
 We Kains are a family of builders. We built this town. Every house adds something unique to it's image. We… let's say we keep track of this process.
 What did you have in store for my home?
 Children! Artemy fell asleep. Though he has disgraced this class, we must continue.\nToday, I'll teach you the right way to eat a person. For a woman, start with the softest flesh. For a man, the internal organs. And please, stay away from anyone with red hair. Their flesh is venomous.
 …Lara?
 Children! Life's rules are simple. \nEveryone for themselves. Everyone's shirt is closer to their skin. It's neither your headache nor your piece of cake. Homō hominī lupus est. You have neither mothers nor fathers. Murder unseen. Repeat after me.
 Stop!
 You've fallen asleep! This is the most important lesson of your life, and you've fallen asleep! The most crucial lesson!\nChildren! What do we say to Artemy? How will we punish him? Will he stand in the corner, like Daniil?
 I wasn't asleep.
 Gravel? What's wrong with you?
 Let's skip straight to the cane…
 Life's rules are simple… Oh, I forgot how it went.
 I've got a question.
 Ask questions with your hand raised! If you have any hands left, I mean.
 Why is Daniil being punished?
 I will be good, I promise…
 This is all a joke, Lara… Isn't it?
 Daniil was punished for insolence. Children! Which of you can tell us why Daniil deserves punishment? Children! Tell us, what awaits him?
 Poverty.
 Glory, I guess…
 Oblivion?
 Children! To survive, to remain resolute, you must heed this lesson. Remember: History is written by winners. There is no truth. The truth is whatever you think it is.
 Pinch me, someone…
 That's true, but…
 If you have a friend, learn to betray them. If you have a lover, disappoint them first, then betray them and leave them behind.\nChildren! I'm teaching you how to survive. What was your homework?
 I did my homework, I swear!
 I'm going to give you a sleeping pill. You need to sleep, Gravel.
 Divination. Lara, you are about to kill a person. You'll be executed for it.
 Hey, can I copy your homework?
 No, you can't. You were rude to me.
 What was the task?
 The rules of life, as always.
 Don't you know it all in advance?
 Don't worry. She won't check yours today.
 Want a gingerbread?
 Sure.
 No.
 Shall we meet after the class?
 Why are you so grown up, anyway? How'd they let you into the school?
 I don't know…
 Why was Daniil punished?
 He told her she doesn't know how to play and only ruins it all.
 Wow… Bold of him.
 Well, it's true.
 Sentry
 It wasn't us. She was already burning when we came here… We tried to save her, but failed.
 It wasn't you? Then who?
 Oh yes, I saw your valiant attempts…
 No. It was a twyre-addled mob. The steppe is in bloom, and people get crazed… But never before was it <i>this</i> bad.
 But what for?
 Why a steppe girl?
 Old wives' tales… They claim a golem sometimes emerges from the ground. It looks like a woman, but is all earth, clay, rock, and marrow. The story claims it has legs of bone and this… uncanny way of walking.\nAnd the brides… You know they have a special walk, too.
 Not a walk. A dance.
 Do people seriously still believe this?
 Us? It wasn't us who did this… unspeakable thing. We'd like to find the scum who did and lay them down next to the poor girl.
 How long have people been this… crazed?
 You will. Our town is a small one.
 What bones? Can't you plainly see that it's a normal girl?
 How will you live with this, now?
 Don't you know how it goes? "Get her!" one screams, and the rest crowd without hesitation… Especially in the night, especially with their minds intoxicated.\nNot everyone can think for themselves. It's easier to just do as you're told.
 Do people scream things like that often around here?
 Shrewd.
 Have you been listening, lad? I'm telling you, this is the first time! The world must be coming to an end…
 Indeed.
 I can't believe my eyes.
 Tell the governor I have a witness! They will confirm I'm innocent in my father's death.
 What kind of witness?
 A girl named Murky.
 A strange kid named Lika. He wears a dog head.
 Who would trust a kid? They'd say anything for a peanut. And if you have witnesses, why were they silent before?
 They weren't given time.
 A child isn't a person?
 That's all right, I'll live. Although, you know... workers sometimes carry bandages and tourniquets around. Lots of injuries at the cannery. Talk to people, perhaps you can trade for some.
 Do lie down. I'll get something for you and come back.
 So you're back, huh?
 Wait some more.
 Here, let me fix that elbow. Hold still...
 Thanks. That's useful to know.
 Nothing for now. I'll come back if I get a bandage.
 Prices will rise two times tomorrow. Four times, a day after that. And Suok knows what will happen two days after tomorrow. I need to stock up today.
 Oh my. How do you know this?
 Don't laugh, but… my bull told me.
 You <i>are</i> a funny man, noukherne!
 Huh?
 Bayarlaa to you for this news, Khatangher. I won't buy your bull; I'd rather spend my money on other things today.
 We line our boats with fingernails to make their path smoother. You have become burdensome, menkhu. Too much death, too much trouble in your chest. Too heavy for a boat to carry.\nWe'll need two fingernails.
 I'm in no position to argue.
 One was enough to carry my burdens before.
 You line their boats with them? But they are just coins, made of metal…
 You didn't carry a whole town on your back before.
 …Have your fingernails.
 I don't have two.
 We believe you didn't kill our patriarch. We'll transport you along the Gullet and the Guzzle, the tributaries of the Gorkhon, our kind river.\nBut it will still cost you fingernails. There's no other way.
 What about toenails?
 Why?
 …Why do you believe me?
 We've heard this joke too many times. It was never funny.
 Sure. Sorry.
 The Gorkhon is a kind river, but its water isn't for humans. You can't drink from the Gorkhon. You ought not walk into it, either.\nWe traverse its edge. It's frightening. We need fingernails, so that we can always return.
 I see.
 Fair enough. I'll keep an eye out for you when I have fingernails and want to travel around faster.
 Because we are ferrymen. We know from which way you came and when.\nThe murders happened at night. You arrived in the morning. We sensed that a new person appeared in the Town. We keep track of that.
 Yeah, well, tell that to the townsfolk.
 Yeah, I remember your sense… thing. Something to do with weight?
 How many of us live here, by the way?
 No one would believe us. We are ferrymen.
 So what?
 Yeah… I forgot.
 Yes. In a way.\nWhen you disengage from the Earth and glide over water, you begin to feel the weight of humanity that Mother Boddho carries on her back.
 People are scared of water.
 I can't tell. The unheard of now happens: People kill other people. So the weight shifts, and shifts, and shifts.\n…One more has just died. No… Two more.
 How do you do this?
 A bad day for our town…
 Put away your fingernails, Burakh the menkhu. Death stands behind your back. We will not carry it on our boats.
 What do you mean, you won't? I'm about to suffocate here…
 Our boats will not leave infected districts. We can carry you into the plague, but not out of it. The air is heavy here. It drives the boat down. If we pull off, we'll sink.
 Am I supposed to go back into that hell now?
 Father is dead. There's a crowd of gawkers by our house. They might know what happened.
 From you? Oh, nothing. I was just sharing.\nFrom the local authorities, though, I want a lot. I want them to make sure that the burial business is supervised by someone a bit older than fifteen, and far more rational! I'll make sure it happens!
 Wait, emshen. Don't bother the girl. Perhaps I can talk sense into her.
 
 Bowman
 
 
 Played vigilantes. Attacked people. I've no idea what got into them, losing any semblance of humanity…\nWho screamed murder in the morning? Who rumor-mongered about the clay golem shaped like a woman? Who started murdering people with no due process?
 I don't know.
 Not me. And I'm not sure what you're talking about.
 Absurdity… How could it happen? How could anyone call themselves human after that?\nGod. Go. Calm down and be on your way.
 I have nothing to do with any of this.
 You're a tough one. You should be a foreman at the Abattoir.
 Something happened this night. I'm not sure what exactly, myself.\nThen a rumor spread: a steppe golem had stolen a woman's shape and started to kill. Stone Age idiocy! They beat several steppe girls to death. I wonder if twyre drives folks insane…
 Were these the ones who beat girls to death?
 They tried. That's all right though; they'll be taken to the Town Hall and dealt with now.
 Wow…
 I was also attacked today. Even though I can hardly be confused for a girl.
 Everyone calm down, now! No more mob justice!\nWhat the fuck do you want? Everything is dealt with over here. No more blood!
 What is dealt with?
 The murderers. It wasn't them. And if it was, it's up for the Judge to decide.\nAre you one of the crazies who can't keep their fists in check?
 Calm down. What did they do?
 I'm Artemy Burakh, Isidor's son. I only arrived today.
 Nope. He's not home. The man's at work in the Town Hall, they say. He's signing orders to catch all the grim-inals.
 Who's not home?
 Grim-what?
 Saburov, the governor. You're here to see him, aren't you?
 Yeah.
 Why won't you go to the Town Hall yourself then?
 I mean, the marauders, the ones who started the hunt in the morning. Did you sleep through it all?
 And who are you waiting for here?
 It's all crowded now… and mine is a quiet business. I'd rather wait here. He won't listen to me there, but here—anything can happen. He's a good man, overall.
 And what exactly do you want from him? Perhaps I can help?
 He used to be decent, yes… If not a lover of drastic measures.
 Nah… You can't. My old man was seized when they discovered there was a shortage at the Warehouse. Only he wasn't to blame, it's Filin's thieves' doing.\nSaburov's an honest man. He'll set it all straight. Only, it might take them a <i>long</i> time to figure out and release my old man. Afraid his case might slip through the cracks…
 You're a good kid.
 It's nice to know he's honest.
 Daniil's mumbling from his corner… I think he just said those are Berkeley's ideas.
 Cub, I'm in trouble. Have you heard about the water?
 No.
 Thank you. Many people have already used the barrel. I told them it was all thanks to you.
 Lara! This water shouldn't be drank!
 Well… I can guess. I've been around the Town, after all.
 We're running out of water. They won't carry in more from the steppe springs because of the quarantine.\nAnd, last night, someone sabotaged the water pumps. The remaining barrels are all we have. Do you understand?
 Sabotaged the water pumps? Why?
 Idiots. It's not cholera.
 Because the Abattoir dumps its waste into the Gorkhon. But the pumps take water from the Gullet and the Guzzle. They're more clear.\nBut today, a rumor spread that the pumps were producing muddy water, because someone allegedly dumped corpses into the tributaries.
 More nonsense. The cemetery isn't far, and it's spacious. We have plenty of room for the dead. For now, anyway.
 This… this is the real epidemic. It infects people's minds.
 Things are bad, Cub. God knows when the water bearers will return to the steppe. Those barrels are all we have, and they'll be guarded. Each person is only allowed one bottle.
 Well, it makes sense. Why would you need more?
 Listen. I want to provide a place for the healthy people who have lost their homes. A home for the living. My house is on the outskirts, so the plague wouldn't reach us here.\nBut this isn't feasible without drinking water.
 A stupid idea! If you invite random people, you're bound to get infected!
 A home for the living… You're still searching for a way to serve, aren't you? Lara, I don't think you have it in you.
 I've always respected you, Gravel. And my respect just grew.
 Father would approve.
 I suppose he would, yes.
 I just have a bad feeling about it.
 In the Middle Town, it's Olgimsky's people who will guard the water… Just tell them. They'll listen.\nPlease, sweet Cub, I beg of you! It's not selfish. It's for a good cause, those poor survivors… No one else cares for the homeless… Please?
 Well… I'll see what I can do, but I'm not sure.
 Oh, don't give me that martyred look! …Fine. I'll do it.
 It won't work, Lara.
 What? Why? The water's muddy, sure, but it's good. Everyone drank it, and no one got sick. I did, too, and look at me: I'm fine!
 What have I done…
 What have you done…
 What have we done…
 What's wrong? Don't let the paranoia get to you. You've done well.
 Let us hope for the best…
 Don't drink from that barrel again. It's not safe.
 
 Now, lend me your eyes and ears. We trust you, so we'll let you in on the Game.
 Whoa. Sounds important.
 Very much so. We've never ever allowed an adult into the Great Game. It's forbidden. You'll be the first.\n…Or rather the second. Believe me, we wouldn't invite you, if not for that first one.
 What first one?
 <i>The</i> one. The one everyone's after. The person who's… well… the Old Man… I mean, you father… I mean, you know.
 What? Are you kidding? Impossible!
 Whoa, you're a beast! Whose idea was it to let the muscle in on the Game? What's next, an invitation to Barley the Thug?
 I'm looking for the murderer, just like you are. As soon as I find them, I won't bother you anymore.
 Pfft. Yeah, right. No one leaves the Game just like that, not after they're invited. You'd rather crawl in a pillow and jump from a cup.
 Have you found anything strange?
 In the Gut, under the stairway. You won't miss it.\nAnd don't forget to leave something! We'll check, too! We'll see what kind of player you are. 'Cause we've had a bunch… Remember Firebrand, the cheapskate? He'd take a watch and leave a pencil… Some personality! At least we figured out it was him quick.
 Relax, relax. I remember the rules.
 So that's what he looks like. Behold, folks.\nSo here's what we want you to know: don't let yourself think we'd let you in on the Game just 'cause you're pretty. No one's happy that we had to do it. Got it? No one knows you yet. And if you spill the beans to any grown-up. you'll mess it all up. Got it?
 Have you found anything?
 Tread lighter, will you? Or you'll wake up the Mistresses. Victoria would be fine, but what if you disturbed Nina?
 I'm here about the caches…
 Yeah, we know. Sleepy Head told us you were in.\nHere's one cache. We found odd things inside. Play well, will you? Don't let us down.
 I'll do my very best.
 Go to the Gut. You'll find a cache there in the boulders, next to a threshing machine.\nJust be sneaky, all right? Don't let anyone see you. Got it?
 Will you calm down… You distrustful chipmunk.
 Look in the Gut, in the boulders, next to a threshing machine.
 See you.
 An inspection, eh? 'Tis all silliness, if you ask me. The water is all right. People drank it, and no one died.
 What inspection?
 So barrels have guards standing over them now?
 Your decision, doctor?
 This barrel is clear. Stand your guard. Water is more precious than gold now.
 You've gone all pale, doctor… Is everything okay? Is the water fine in this barrel?
 How would I know if it's dangerous? I guess it would be smart to take a sample to Dankovsky. He's the microscope man.
 You know what? Take this barrel to the outskirts, to Ravel's house. I'll examine it there.
 I'm not sure. This water is indeed strange. It has this odor… but that doesn't mean anything. Let me think.
 Boater
 Hah, what a face! A loser's face.
 Appearance isn't everything.
 Look who's talking.
 "And this pestilence was the more virulent for that, by communication with those who were sick thereof, it gat hold upon the sound, no otherwise than fire upon things dry or greasy, whenas they are brought very near thereunto. Nay, the mischief was yet greater…" And why was that, I wonder?
 Are you quoting something?
 …Something about touching. Can't remember the exact wording.
 By all means. He is a heavenly man. He won't take care of himself.
 
 Your brother, who is he?
 In a hundred years, the whole Town will be dead and forgotten, yet my brother's name will live in human memory. That's who he is.
 We'll be dead and forgotten way sooner than that.
 As if the point of living is being remembered after death…
 You are being hunted. You'll need a weapon.
 Yeah… I could use one.
 It just so happens that no one carries firearms around these parts. It's a peaceful town.
 Peaceful, my ass…
 That's for the best.
 Pushing me in the direction of bloodshed, huh?
 Like you needed pushing…\nListen, we respected Old Burakh. You are the only person who can replace him. We don't want to see you dead, too.
 Thanks.
 So what do you suggest?
 And it just so happens that I have a revolver. But I can't give it away for free. For a reasonable price, though…
 Where did you get it?
 Why can't you just give it to me?
 I work in pickling. The Factory stopped working today. We fear it may be the first sign of serious trouble: Big Vlad is no charity. He cares little for his workers.\nIf I lose my job, our family is about to have a very rough time. Surely you understand.
 I do. How much?
 Our storekeeper has his way of finding… curios. He orders them from the big world, to be delivered by train, on Big Vlad's behalf.\nThat's all right. The Master can take it.
 Who is this brave storekeeper?
 Forget it. So, are you interested in the deal?
 How much for the revolver?
 Ah, Bad Grief… Why am I not surprised?
 Three thousand.
 Are you nuts? I don't have this sort of money.
 What's your price?
 Fair enough. Show me.
 I can wait for two days. If you don't take it by then, I'll do business with someone else. My circumstances are humble.\nAs for the money, you'll have no trouble getting it. Isidor must have left you inheritance. It's hard to talk about it now, I understand, but business is business.
 Inheritance, pah… I suspect I'll have a hard time obtaining it.
 Drop it. I didn't come here for the inheritance, I wanted to see my father!
 Secondly, Isidor must have taught you how to hear and pick medicinal herbs. They're in bloom now. And merchants in the Broken Heart would give you a decent price for them.
 Yeah, I know a thing or two about herbs.
 Fine. I'll be back tomorrow, or maybe even today.
 Can I at least take a look at the revolver?
 Steeper
 I want to ask Sahba how to make all those hundreds of people obey me. It's important! They won't listen!
 Should they?
 Wow. Actual hundreds?
 I say, "Stop knocking!" But they knock. I say, "Let me take a look at all my domain!" But they won't. I say, "I want a new calf!" They bow silently and walk out. But I don't need a bow! I need a calf!
 Perhaps you should agree to a pony?
 Outrageous.
 Well… more. But I can only count to a hundred for now.
 Then better ask Sahba to teach you numbers.
 Even more? Who are those people?
 My father's house. My house.
 My father's house. My house.
 Really? You do look like a steppe person. Who are you then?
 Right… I suppose people jumping from its windows just wanted to let some air in.
 Wake up! Someone's looking for you! C'mon!
 Who?
 Don't <i>c'mon</i> me, kid. I'm coming.
 Someone important. I wouldn't be waking you otherwise.
 If it's not Simon Kain himself, you are <i>so</i> grounded.
 What time is it?
 I can tell you what time it isn't—it <i>isn't</i> time to sit on your hands. People always wake doctors up. That's what the Old Man used to say…
 Yeah, he did. Thanks for the heads-up.
 Well excuse me, doctor, for being cranky. Us paramedics should really be humbler around you.
 What are you planning to do? Where will you start?
 I'll start with thinking hard about the challenge you posed to me.
 I'll look closer at the kids. Why'd he gather them? Who is this Eighth? Suspicious…
 I should have gone to see Grace first. Hope there's still a chance.
 I should have gone to see Grace first. Hope there's still a chance.
 Have you forgotten out faces already? We asked you for help. We wanted to be let into the Warrens.
 …Right. I couldn't persuade Big Vlad. Here's your money.
 I've got nothing to tell you.
 What about our money?
 I had to spend it. Sorry.
 Oh yeah… here is it. Have it back.
 By the way, have you heard about Saburov looking for volunteer patrolmen? \nPlease tell me it's not to send a new raiding party after you. I'll sigh with relief knowing that the man merely wants to instill martial law in our godforsaken village. I like knowing what my competitors think.
 No, we've talked already. It's not about me.
 Heh… Funny indeed.
 Actually, I'd be happy to volunteer. It's honest work and a piece of bread, at least for now.
 We're closing.
 You don't seem too inviting. Isn't it a bit too early to close?
 Where's Var?
 I don't know who you're talking about.
 He would. I'm Isidor Burakh's son.
 It's my shop. I can close it whenever I please. What did you want?
 I want to see Var.
 I brought meat.
 But I know him. And I know what he sells. And I have it with me. And it's the kind of goods that spoils quickly. So?
 The door to your right. Then turn left. Then go ahead. And don't take long.
 That's up to me, pal.
 Got it. You, keep closing. You were closing the shop, right?
 Your son spends all his time up there?
 A children's stash is here somewhere.
 
 
 Boös wants to talk to me about my inheritance… My home.
 
 
 Georgiy Kain plans to take our house. If only I remembered where exactly to find him…
 Georgiy Kain plans to take our house. I've no intention to live there, but I have every right to sell it myself. \n\nIf only I remembered where exactly to find him…
 
 
 The Judge changed his mind. The Kains are strange.\n\nTo prove my rights of ownership, I need to hand the paper signed by the Judge to the Hindquarters district prefect.
 
 
 Anyone is free to take anything in the houses contaminated by odd black smog.
 
 
 My rights to the house have been restored.
 I'm listening.
 Were you the person who left my father a note? It was attached to a key.
 
 
 There is a familiar name on Father's list.
 Boös Vlad took an interest in me. He might know something useful.
 
 
 Home sweet home is locked. The local authorities must have the key.
 
 
 This house has been defiled. I don't want to live in a place where his blood was spilled. \n\nBut leaving empty-handed doesn't sound like a good idea either.
 
 
 It's been foretold I will "spill a river of blood" soon. Guess someone will find their death under my knife, after all.
 
 
 It's been foretold I will "spill a river of blood" soon. Guess someone will find their death under my knife, after all.
 Capella is the leader of the Town's children. She might know what Father wanted with the ones on his list.
 There is a familiar name on the list: Capella. That's what they call Olgimsky's daughter. A mature girl the other kids flock to. If anyone knows about the list, it's her.
 Kids sometimes spend their time at the Station.
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place… Not just them, either.
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place… Not just them, either. Even if Sahba's not around anymore, her place remains.
 
 
 Murky was unhelpful. Should I return to Grace, perhaps?
 Father is dead. I won't waste a girl's life to touch him one last time.
 
 
 Five years ago, soon after I left the Town, an outbreak of a horrible disease happened here. Father… destroyed it. \n\nTogether with the carriers.
 Not everyone who came to pay final respects to Father knew him well, but someone here must have.
 There was a list of… patients, maybe?… in Father's vessel thing. These look like children's nicknames.\n\n1. Sticky\n2. Capella\n3. Murky\n4. Notkin\n5. Khan\n6. Grace\n7. Taya Tycheek\n8. ["Udurgh" sigil]
 Aspity
 I loved your father, emshen. Few did. All he got was respect.
 Is that so? Why?
 Who are you, khetey?
 He wanted change. Bothered those who feared change. Made them feel anxiety and pain. Few people liked it.
 But you did, huh?
 Yes. That's the kind of man he was.
 Your father made me. Created me out of clay, so to speak. He's the one who called me Sahba. Before that, I was Usp'tae. Few liked that.\nI am evil, emshen. People fear me. And for a good reason, too. But I can see your father in you, so I will be your trusted friend, kholboön.
 So what do you want from me, khetey?
 Sounds great. Can't say that many people want to be my friends these days.
 I've been looking for you for a while. Where were you? What were you doing? Why haven't you come to bury your father?
 I… I didn't even know.
 I had no time.
 I was in jail. Arrested yesterday.
 Follow me, emshen.
 Who are you?
 I saw you. Back there, at the funeral.
 Don't you want to accept your father's inheritance?
 Did he leave me one?
 I don't. Leave me alone.
 He did. Be khara, this is the most important thing to ever happen to you. Let's go.
 Let's go.
 Shame. He needed you. Waited for you.
 A shame indeed.
 Needed me? Why?
 You are his son. How is a man to be buried without his son's will? He was lying in the open for a while. Refused to go into the ground. So we had to give him to the sky.
 What do you mean?
 There's some sort of trouble brewing in the Hindquarters and around.
 I'm aware… Yes, I'm aware of that, my boy. \nWhat's going on in the Hindquarters? What's that floating dirt folk babble on about? My Factory doesn't fume like that, no… I keep my property nice and tidy.
 I don't know. Everyone's confused.
 I'm ready to sell you the house, boös.
 Glad to hear it. We'll speak about this later.
 I thought you gave me your word.
 Very well. I'm not in a hurry.
 Whatever it is, people are suffering out there.
 I've carried this thing for several days. It wasn't easy, of course. With this, I share with you my fear, my sorrow, and my anger. It was tough, but now it's become a little easier. Just a little.\nThank you for easing my burden.
 In return, I give you some of my grief.
 With this, I give you some of my hope. We have no doctor now… Who will help us? Who will treat our injuries, or deliver children?\nYou're a surgeon. You can do all that. So have some of our hope. And hope often leads to love.
 With this item, I give you… uh, I don't know. Whatever you want.
 Great. With this item, I give you… some of my luck, I guess? People say I have that in spades. Don't know if I believe it.\nNow, what shall you give me?
 Patience.
 Uh, whatcha giving me with this thing?
 What are <i>you</i> giving <i>me?</i>
 Some of us wait for you at the Square. The Bridge Square, that is. In the Stone Yard. You know how to get there?
 Why there? I don't go there often.
 Hey, uncle… Dig a hole for us, will you?
 What for?
 You've interrupted a difficult conversation. I think you should leave.
 Perhaps I can help?
 What are you doing here?
 What's your name, girl?
 I understand there are things you want to know. You think we might tell you, if you ask right. But we won't. Not now. You're an interloper.
 Fine. I'm leaving then.
 You are two serious girls…
 Parleying. It's our business.
 I'd like to know more.
 All right. I'm leaving.
 So why did you interrupt our argument?
 What argument?
 What's it to you?
 There used to be two Mistresses, right? Nina and Victoria. One burned; the other soothed. Nina died, so Katerina replaced her. Then Victoria died, and Katerina was torn apart. Now there are no more mistresses. The Town is unprotected. Do you follow?
 Not really.
 I do.
 <i>Q.E.D.</i> \nBut it's none of your concern, Burakh. So you bumped into us accidentally, whatever. But why couldn't you keep your big mouth shut? Don't you understand that words have power? You utter a word 'cause you're bored, and the whole future changes.
 It changes constantly.
 I'm terse, actually.
 Nina and Victoria are dead. Katerina is incapable. So their daughters are coming into power. There have always been two Mistresses. Now there are three of us. That's too many. Only one will remain. Do you get just how important that is?
 And the lucky one will be you, of course.
 It sounds crazy.
 Perhaps.
 Maybe I should go back to them and tell them of your good intentions.
 Good luck, then.
 Listen carefully, Burakh. Look at me. I will make it so that you can only talk to people when it doesn't interfere with my plans. This is your first warning. If you get in my way again, I'll take your speech away completely. Got it?
 Nope.
 Well, now I'll go back and talk to the girls just to spite you. I love meddling with the future.
 It's not your doing. I wasn't always able to speak to who I wanted to before, either.
 Oh, so you don't believe me? Be my guest. Go back and talk to the girls, then. Or try to.
 You're a funny girl…
 I do believe you. Take pity on my poor soul.
 Listen to me! You're doing the wrong thing! You're getting in everyone's way. You rip a very delicate web with your rough paws. You Burakhs are only good at tearing, never connecting. Ripper…
 That's my job.
 We're good at both. You'll see.
 Do you need me to explain like you're two? You approach someone I have a plan for. You try to talk to them. And nothing happens. Your mouth won't open. Clear now?
 I think you're confusing yourself with God.
 How will I know who you have plans for?
 By trying and failing to talk to them.
 Fair enough.
 Thanks for the fun.
 Where do you think you're going, buddy?
 I just wanna ask something…
 Greetings. I am sorry to inform you that you're officially banned from joining the watch. Governor's orders.
 Am I banned because I'm a doctor? I should be free to do whatever I want.
 Saburov sure seems ready to take up the reins of power. It's about time, if you ask me.
 Why is that?
 It does seem rough to the touch. Have you tried? They say it is. Even if it doesn't look it. Looks greasy, though.\nIt's like that saying, what was it…
 What's that mold?
 The house is all sick. Must be shingles.\nVerochka had shingles last year. Mom thought it was the coughs, but then the doctor said it was just shingles. "Rash shingles." Got it from a cat. That's what he said.
 But the house isn't alive.
 Look alive, brothers and sisters! This one is in cahoots with Notkin's crew. So tell me, old man… Which side are you really on?
 So what did they tell you?
 You kids play curious games these days… Our times were simpler.
 …It doesn't work.
 How long ago did it break?
 Whoa! WHOOOA! What is it—? How is it—? Whoa!
 This is our town.
 Do you have fresh nuts? We can trade them for rare ones.
 Hungry?
 She's always like that! Always wants to go first! We want to play, too!
 Hey, this is no place for children. Do you even know what happened here yesterday?
 I'll be the witch! I'll be the witch!
 You're not afraid of fire, are you?
 
 What made you think so?
 Well, it was signed with your initials, and I thought…
 Just a guess.
 So there was a key, huh?
 Yes.
 I don't throw keys around… I keep them close. Your father had his own house, and he never locked it… Always open… Unafraid of thieves…\nThank you, Master Burakh, for letting me know. I'll be sure to investigate… this mysterious key.
 Don't. I'm sorry I bothered you.
 Not every key in this town is yours to throw around, boös.
 …No, nothing. I just realized I'm talking to the wrong man.
 Signed "V.O."
 More than one person in the world happens to have these initials… but not all of them have keys to spare. \nI think I know who V. O. is. Ugh… Indeed that son of mine is punishment from God… plotting behind my back now… but I'll get to him.
 How is it a bad thing?
 So that was your son, huh? Also a Vlad Olgimsky…
 Yeah, yeah. Only I'm not an old man. I'm a man who has no time for idle chatter and hates it when people clutter their room for now reason.\nCome back when you have meat.
 Got it, you spider of a man. See you.
 You live in a drugstore. A shop. I have every right to be here.
 I've found a note and a key in Father's house. Signed, "V.O." Were you the one who granted him access to a Factory cellar?
 So you've found it… I hope you had enough sense not to mention it to my father, also a "V.O.", who happens to own the Factory, all its cellars, and all its workers.
 Whoa. You rebelled against your father? How did it happen?
 I've talked to him. But I didn't go into details.
 Yes, you're the man who buys blood. I remember. Just curious what you need help with.
 This house smells of blood.
 This house smells of blood.
 
 
 Barter is not only a way to obtain useful items, but a way to get closer to people. Everyone has something of their own to share.
 
 
 I've yet to seriously barter with anyone—not men, women, not even teenagers or kids.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any women, teenagers, or kids.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men, teenagers, or kids.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men, women, or kids.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men or women.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men, or any teenagers, either.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men, or any kids, either.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any women, or any teenagers, either.
 Clara
 Capella
 When a person finds themselves in a relatively enclosed space, it influences their inner state in a certain way. It's no secret.\nThe Kains are trying to create buildings that enhance spiritual growth.
 …As in?
 Well, we're moving to the field of philosophy now… Not my area of expertise.\nBut as far as I can tell, in their eyes, humans aren't paragon of animals, but rather larvae. They believe the human spirit is a spring to be stretched. Their favorite image.
 Why stretch it?
 I'm sorry for saying this, but it's ridiculous.
 Nah, they've just let their wealth go to their heads. Huge fortunes, weird fantasies, and unrestricted power will do that to people.
 To make people desire new things. Weird things. Things beyond their limits.
 Such attempts do not bode well.
 People do that their whole lives anyway.
 …Does that <i>really</i> demand making roads so confusing?
 
 Chara
 I've yet to seriously barter with any women, or any kids, either.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any teenagers or kids.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any women.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any teenagers.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any kids.
 I've bartered with most elements of the Town. Now they'll accept me back as their own.
 A children's stash is here somewhere. And more players of the Game spend their time nearby. I should keep my eyes peeled.
 Herb Bride
 Mysterious Herb Bride
 Smokey
 Hey, khayaala! This is my final offer. Buy my bull. I will not return here again, it is time to leave.
 Messenger
 Prefect
 Messenger
 Hindquarters Prefect
 Kids nest in this house, where strange things happen.
 The air feels solid around this house.
 Oops! Hush! You shouldn't know about this. Just forget it!
 I heard nothing.
 There are ferrymen in the town. They're waiting for me.
 
 I think they really took me for father's murderer. The rumor will spread in no time.
 People hide their eyes when they see me.
 People avoid me in the streets.
 People lock their windows and hide children when I approach.
 There's a hunt going on, looking for a person with my features.
 I've yet to seriously barter with any men, women, or teenagers.
 Nightjar
 Pigeon
 Messenger
 Here, have this item. This is for you.
 What's this?
 Taya Tycheek… So she's in there, huh?
 Yes.
 And I was just looking for her.
 Yeah, I already know she's in there. I, too, would have liked to see her.
 We went to the Warren, we stood by its walls, we hoped to be let in the ark. The pest is spreading across the Town, we wanted to hide.\nIf we can't get to Mother Taya, we can at least find refuge at Sahba. She is also like a mother to us. She will teach us how to protect ourselves.
 Children of many mothers, aren't you… Even Mother Boddho caresses your step still.
 Well, here's what I'll say: You were wrong to have come to this town. You should have stayed back in the steppe.
 Bite kharaan, you're back. What say you?
 Who are you?
 Lucky you.
 People don't dig holes in this town. Don't you know?
 Please, uncle… We only need a shallow one! A couple of shovel swings, nothing more!
 Are you burying a cat?
 Yeah. I mean… no. Not a cat.
 Then whom?
 Just… the Eighth.
 Huh? The eighth what?
 Well, the previous seven are already pushing the daisies. And nothing bad happened when we buried them! Because the holes were shallow.
 I guess shallow ones are allowed… All right. I'll dig you a hole.
 No, kids. One should not dig holes in the ground. Period.
 We need it.
 I don't think you do.
 This is actually hard work. What would be my reward?
 A burial gift. Everyone gets to take something away from a funeral. That's why we're holding it!
 Are you burying a cat?
 No, kids. You know full well that I can't.
 Kids are doing something here.
 Kids want me to fix their lantern. I'll need a handful of metal scrap.
 Kids gather here at night.
 Kids gather here some evenings.
 Nutshell
 Only children live in this house. Its windows glean with a strange light.
 Only children live in this house.
 
 
 I got the herbs.
 
 
 I need the stems of black, bloody, and brown twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of black, bloody, and brown twyre.
 I need the stems of black and bloody twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of black and brown twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of bloody and brown twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of black and bloody twyre.
 I need the stems of black and brown twyre.
 I need the stems of bloody and brown twyre.
 I need the stems of black twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of bloody twyre, and swevery.
 I need the stems of brown twyre, and swevery.
 Now I only need the stem of black twyre.
 Now I only need the stem of bloody twyre.
 Now I only need the stem of brown twyre.
 Now I only need to find swevery.
 I've collected all the herbs. 
 
 I'm here on important business.
 Everyone here wants to ask something.
 I'm not here to join the watch. I'm a doctor.
 I don't give a damn. Wait for your turn like everyone else.
 Must be nice to have all time in the world.
 Everyone is here on important business.
 I'm not here to join the watch!
 Whatever.
 Get off my case.
 Because you can't trust people, that's why! The rule of the three families was about trust—in each other and in the townsfolk. The damned nobles trusted people to govern themselves. \nAnd the people? They are unruly beasts. They don't respond to kindness, only strength.
 In my experience, people respond better to kindness.
 Our rulers were kind and lenient. Where did it get us? Yesterday blood flowed like water, and a woman was burned to death at the Bone Stake Lot!\nTrust! Pah! Leniency leads to corruption. What we need is someone who can keep the rabble in check.
 There's no point in arguing with you lot…
 Yeah, it's about time.
 Speaking of strength… How do I join the town watch?
 Open your eyes, the line is right there.
 Why does Saburov need so many people?
 It wasn't kindness that killed those people.
 I can see your point.
 To maintain order, of course. To prevent yesterday's nightmare from ever happening again.\nOlgimsky only cares about what he owns. The Kains treat the whole Town as family—no wonder they got soft. Now, they're all getting their comeuppance.
 So you think people are unworthy of trust?
 Why? Did you run out of leather caps? I can get my own.
 I would like to remind you that you're currently on probation. Until the murderer of Simon Kain, Isidor Burakh, and several others is brought to justice, you're still considered a suspect. There's evidence against you.
 Enough blabbering. I'd rather speak to Saburov himself. Is he inside?
 How many times do I have to say it? I'm innocent!
 Are you here about the house?
 Yes, I am here about the house.
 What house?
 Your own, of course. \nOn governor's orders, it was locked down during the investigation of Isidor Burakh's death. Since the investigation's over, the governor can grant you access. Isn't that why you're here?
 I guess it is now…
 I'm here about something else.
 A sign of trust.\nAs we share things with each other, so do we share our feelings. Warmth. Kindness. We see now that you're a good person. The Town trusts you. Do you want to become its part?
 Well… Yes, I guess.
 I <i>am</i> its part.
 I know this game. We barter and share.
 Huh. Unexpected.
 Do you like the item I've given you? Will you find any use for it? I don't really know what you need… I chose randomly. We don't know you very well yet.
 What do you want in exchange?
 It doesn't matter! All that matters is that there <i>was</i> an exchange. You give me something of yours and receive something of mine.\nAll items are charged with bits of your warmth and life… Give me whatever you want. To others, give what <i>they</i> want. They won't ask a lot. So if you share generously and give more than is asked, the Town will remember that.\nIt's just a token, after all. A tradition.
 Others?
 I don't really need anything.
 Yes. Go and barter with different people. Not anyone in particular, just… different. Women and men, teenagers and little kids. You'll see what happens.
 And what happens?
 You'll get to know us better. We'll get to know you better. Our town is like a family.\nYou have returned. Now, please help us remember, accept, and maybe even love you. I'm saying it on behalf of everyone.
 Bayarlaa, basaghan. Please relay my gratitude to them.
 I know this tradition…
 I won't do it. I don't need your love.
 I'll look like an idiot. That's what will happen.
 Well, at least I'll know what each of you is interested in this September. That'll come in handy.
 Just have some of my warmth. Warmth is life.
 I give you only this item. Perhaps you'll find it useful.
 I haven't carried this item for long. There's little of me in it. Still, have some of my warmth.
 I share with you some of my grief, because it's all that I have for now. I'm sorry, basaghan.
 Courage.
 Compassion.
 Care.
 Wit. That's what we all need the most now.
 Oh… I don't know.
 No, that's not how it works. Don't you know the rules?
 All right, I'll give you… uh… hmm. What would you like?
 Some rest.
 Well… a little joy, I suppose.
 A couple of nice dreams.
 Well, neither do I.
 To leave this place.
 To have my father back, little one. But that's only a dream.
 Lancet
 Depends on who you are.
 We're the Dogheads, and they're the Soul-and-a-Halves. We're above, and they're below. We live in the Tower, and they crawl in the Earth. They're drawn to animals, and we reach for the stars. What's so hard to comprehend?
 So, you're the good guys, and they're the bad?
 I'm on my own.
 Are you dumb? This isn't a game of cops and robbers, it's serious stuff. They're pulling the Town one way, and we, another.
 How does that even work?
 I see. Got a little war on your hands, eh?
 I don't feel dumb.
 That's our great conflict, old man. The Soul-and-a-Halves see our Tower as the root of all evils, and we can't live without it. The Tower makes people into super-people. The Soul-and-a-Halves would rather become mindless pets.
 So if they want to be beasts, why are you the ones wearing the dog masks?
 You know, I think I got it. You've explained it pretty well.
 For a good reason. These masks remind us we're still beasts, and the true humans inside us are yet to come out. They can't see well, are almost deaf, and speak only in gibberish. Lots of room left for growth.
 And what's with the four on one?
 What do you even want, big man? Have you come to drag us home? Tough luck. We're going home when we want and not a minute earlier.
 As I see it, there's a fight brewing here. What's the problem, kids?
 Can't you just leave them alone?
 It's <i>they</i> who won't leave <i>us</i> alone. Day after day they lure our guys outside and take them down.
 And what's with the four on one?
 First off, it's four on one and a Half. He does have half a soul more than ordinary folk. Second, we're not here to kick his ass. They're the ones keen on bashing us with clubs and worse.\nUs, we're a peaceful bunch. We fight only in self-defense.
 Why did you drive him up there like a cat up a tree…?
 We're teaching him discipline. He should get used to heights.
 I've had my fill of such "teachers."
 Aren't you upstanding citizens.
 You don't mind if I go upstairs and talk to him too, do you?
 Go ahead, who's stopping you? See for yourself—the higher you go, the better it gets.
 Great. See ya.
 I find the down below no less fascinating.
 Pfft, yeah, right. Have fun with all the stiffs and maggots around you.
 That's not all there is.
 Can't argue with that.
 Will they beat you if you get down?
 Hell if I know…
 Do you need help?
 And they said there's more than one of you here. But I only see you.
 My half went to the Warehouses to call for help.
 So, a huge fight is brewing, huh?
 That's all right. All will be quiet when we gather at the Station this evening. That's our no man's land. A good place.
 So you gather at the Cargo Station?
 It used to be peaceful. Each gang only mingled with their own. But recently, it escalated into outright war. To be honest, we struck first… but that's 'cause they got under our skin.\nYou be on your way, big man. Adults have no business with our wars.
 Are you sure you don't need my help?
 We'll manage on our own.
 As you wish.
 To be fair, it's beautiful up here…
 That you're in team "no heights."
 I'm in team freedom. And our team dislikes zealots. We don't appreciate being dragged by the collar to turn into angels, or wind, or whatever… All in good time.
 I see. Do you need help?
 Oh, I see. So how bad do you beat them?
 Maybe I can parley peace between your two factions?
 You're one of Notkin's, right? We had a curious conversation yesterday.
 You're one of Notkin's, right? We had a curious conversation yesterday.
 Notkin does everything right. Fast on the draw. His father got killed in the war, mom died during childbirth. Most of our lot are orphans. That's why we're tough.
 So they come to preach, and you answer with sticks?
 I see… Damn this war.
 Stop prying. Grown-ups are not welcome where we gather. You ruin everything.
 If you don't like me, I'll leave and won't ever return.
 Yeah, I've heard.
 At the Passenger one. We used to gather at the Cargo, it was cooler. But now it's all boarded off. You'll only end up with broken legs, and we've got girls and little kids there, too… So now we gather at the platform.
 I'll drop by, if that's fine by you.
 I'll just peek with one eye.
 Fair enough.
 Each has two eyes and two ears. Most have one nose and one mouth.\nRiddle me this: If eyes and ears were switched, what would be right? If noses and mouths were switched, what would be fixed?
 That's a tough one.
 Nothing. Everything is fine the way it is.
 Just eat less before you go to sleep, and you'll stop having nightmares.
 
 
 
 What's wrong with her? We didn't do anything, I swear! We saw her crying, asked what happened. But she just bawled even more. Eh, girls…
 Maybe she's hungry?
 Why aren't you running away? Aren't you scared? Boo!
 Of course I'm scared. But I'm a brave man.
 
 What are you gawking at? Do you know who he is? He's Whitebeard's son! His dad went crazy yesterday and hurt people!
 So?
 
 My dad didn't hurt anyone yesterday! Tell them to get off me!
 I'll handle this.
 Even if he did, it wasn't <i>your</i> fault…
 На Пустыре Костного Столба происходит расправа над некой «людоедкой».
 "Rough as dutch, safe to touch. Smooth as bone, leave it alone."
 Yeah, that one…\nOnly, I always thought it was about the road less taken and such? "Rough" means a hard choice; "smooth," taking an easy path. And we all know where those lead… Right?
 What is this… mold?
 Right.
 Who knows. Something's wrong with the air. This must be it. Some sort of soot from the Factory… Guess that's why it was shut down.\nOnly… it's growing fast, and the tinge is wrong. I wonder what they used for fuel there…
 Like I know.
 I really should leave this place, breathing this soot can't be healthy… Right?
 Sure. No need to take pointless risks.
 Soot would spread evenly. And this is some sort of mold.
 And who is that, touching this thing? That can't be a good idea! "Rough as dutch…"
 Who told you that? All the houses are alive around here.
 Come on. It's made of stone and wood.
 What doctor was that?
 Grandfather Isidor. He's a good doctor. He gave Verochka an ointment from herbs and ground stuff, and she got better in a week. Only we had to cut her hair.\nIf you ever get sick, go to him. He'll cure you in a second.
 No, he won't. You'll have to come to me now, with your shingles and measles.
 Thanks, kiddo. This is great advice. If I ever get sick, I'll go right to him.
 Nuh huh. They can breathe and talk. For real! Don't you believe me?
 Of course I believe you.
 Why did you get all sad all of a sudden?
 Don't mind me.
 So you're saying the house is sick, huh?
 Can't you see? Dad says it's soot. But I don't think it's soot.
 But a house isn't alive. It can't get sick.
 I don't think it's soot, either. I think it's mold.
 When I was your age, everything talked to me too…
 …Ah. Still my same old hometown.
 I'm not crying. I'm not. I'm just… upset. Upset, because they're always picking on me. All the time…
 Who's picking on you, dear?
 Are you playing hide-and-seek?
 Oh, right, sorry. I am. Running away now.
 No, not that! Not hide-and-seek!
 What then?
 Bone leg!
 How do you play that?
 I have bone legs, see? I'm a clay wench! I cannot walk, but whoever sees me runs away in fear. You should run away too!
 But you have normal legs…
 Isn't it boring, just sitting here in one place?
 I'm not bored. Clay wenches don't get bored!
 How do you know so much about them?
 Want me to stand here in your place?
 You're ruining it! Run away already! Ugh, I can't even stomp my foot… I'll bite you!
 Okay, okay…
 You can't reach me.
 So now you want to stone him to death?
 He's the same as his father! Ask him! Ask him why his dad is called Whitebeard. Ask him!
 I'd rather ask you.
 He started it!
 There's a bit too many of you, and only one of him, don't you think?
 Now calm down, everyone.
 I'm not sure I want to.
 That's 'cause he's a drunk! He gets smashed and attacks people! He raised a hand against my mom last year!
 A son does not answer for his father's actions.
 Why do you get in our way? One way or the other, we'll get him.
 Go get his father if you want. But leave the kid alone. I won't tell you twice!
 Scram, will you? You little imps…
 If he grows up to be like his father, then meet here again in ten years. Same place, same people.
 They're saying they didn't do anything to you. So what's going on?
 They say I'm ugly. I know I am… But why do they need to keep saying it all the time?
 Nonsense. You're very pretty.
 You're unlike anyone else. Trust me on that.
 Well, so it goes. Don't worry, you'll grow into your beauty. Maybe.
 Well… Those ones are okay, I guess. But even if they didn't say anything, I know they're thinking about it!
 What do people say to you?
 Everyone.
 How are they picking on you?
 Yeah, girls are… sensitive.
 Just… don't tell her that she's… well, not pretty. Okay?
 But she <i>is</i> okay. Pretty, even, if someone washed her up…
 Exactly.
 So hush. You don't have to say every thought out loud.
 I guess. She must be hungry. Why else would she be crying?
 Or maybe she's lost?
 I guess. She must be lost. Maybe we should take her to the Station?
 And get her on a train to somewhere…
 Trains aren't running now. But… we should probably see if she lives around here.
 Yeah, you do that.
 I'm kidding. Leave her alone. She'll calm down.
 You should go catch a groundhog for her. Or just pick some flowers.
 Everybody knows <i>that!</i> They burned a steppe bogeywoman here. A clay wench of herbs and bones.
 But it's no laughing matter… How can you play this out?
 What are you doing here?
 We're playing.
 Playing what?
 Clay.
 What kind of game is that?
 It's not a good place for games. Shoo.
 No. They burned a living person here. Now scram!
 Well… We're curious.
 They're curious. Bah!
 It's not curious, kids, it is sad.
 Not for long, I'm afraid.
 Huh? What do you mean?
 They're going to tie you up and douse you with kerosine. And when you catch fire, they'll get scared and run away. How do you like that?
 Huh?! What do you mean? That's not funny at all!
 Spot on! It's not funny! You better go play with dolls. Witch, my ass...
 I've been sent here. To make sure that everything is for real.
 I'm dead serious.
 Speak of the devil! You've started to like coming here, haven't you? Are you sure your boots won't wear down?
 Well… I missed you.
 We've been talking, while we were waiting for you.
 What did you talk about?
 Unhappy to see me again?
 Aren't you supposed to be terribly busy? I don't understand why you keep coming.\nOr do you need my help again? I'll wash your clothes. You're filthy, like a chimney sweep. Revolting. While they dry, have some sleep.
 …What's wrong with you, basaghan? Woke up on the wrong side of the bed?
 I hate it when you call me that! Is it so hard to remember? "Basaghan" your steppe girls, not me!
 They're not my steppe girls. They belong to the Kin.
 Fine! What's wrong with you, ekhene?
 All right. Abgay, what got into you today?
 And what does <i>that</i> word mean?
 It's like "the elder sister." Would you prefer that?
 "My sweet." "My dear."
 Yeah…?\nOne of yours came to me today. Asked a lot of questions. Said she was promised you… Said a lot of things… Did you ever promise to marry her?
 Whoa… I'm liking it less and less all of a sudden.
 That's fine. I can do without your help. And I can leave, if you don't want me here.
 I promised her nothing. I don't even remember her. She just keeps… tagging along, asking stupid questions.
 Why in the world should you care?
 Ugh, whatever. Like it's any of my business… Do whatever you want.\nDid you make peace with Stakh?
 Doesn't look like it…
 Thrush
 Measly
 
 
 
 Foreman Oyun wants to see me.
 Cricket
 Kid
 Fresh? As in… not ripe?
 Are <i>you</i> nuts? You can't eat nuts! They're alive!
 Alive?
 You're so dense… We've already heard all these walnuts and chestnuts have to say. So now we can barter them away. The new is always more interesting.
 And what did they have to say?
 They told us that we can find shmowders in this very yard. We call it the Powder Bag. Boka and Turochka used to live here. They were the shmowder-makers…
 "Shmowders"?
 Where are they now?
 They grew up and left. A long time ago! No one's been making new shmowders for a while now… The old stock is all we have left. So we're hunting them down.
 What are these shmowders good for?
 No! Fresh, as in, with fresh people inside!
 What?
 They're like… powders. Very valuable. We'll later trade them for needles, or a knife.
 You're not allowed to carry needles or knives.
 You're so dumb! Think we don't know? That's exactly why we need shmowders. Don't you understand?
 No, I don't.
 Ah, now I see. You kids are little criminals.
 So where are those shmowders of yours hiding?
 How about we play hide-and-seek? We'll look for powders, and you'll look for us.
 No, I'm not good at hide-and-seek.
 Well… All right.
 You're it! Turn around, so that you don't see us, and count to five. Then seek!
 Just to five? Let's see if you're that fast…
 Why make it so complicated?
 Shmowders like hide-and-seek, too. They like to see people play. They get curious. Then it's easier to find them!
 I see… Okay, I'll help you.
 Sorry, kids. This is just too complicated for me.
 Can I have one? Or see one, at least?
 Okay. Ready or not…
 Got it. But no cheating!
 Not all of them, of course. Just the ones that caught someone. A memory, you know? Of a dead person. \nSometimes they tell interesting things. Like ours, they do! You can't imagine how long it took us to get our hands on these...
 Why barter them away then?
 Trading nuts for nuts? Now that's profitable.
 What interesting things? Like, secrets?
 Have you, like, seen them?
 All evidence points to this. They leave strange items in our game. Everyone's scared…\nWe wanted to catch them ourselves at first… But Sleepy Head convinced us it was serious. That we need you. Especially since it does concern you.
 What items?
 Where did they leave those items?
 We've seen whatever they left in our game. That's enough.
 What game?
 So, lemme explain.\nWe have these caches, lots of them, all over the Town. That's where we leave messages and gifts for one another. It's a test of intuition. If you find one, you get to the next level. It also tests greed… Whoever takes items without giving anything in return, gets kicked out. \nBut that's not important. Not what you should be thinking about.
 What should I be thinking about, then?
 Good thinking on Sleepy Head's part.
 All right, I believe you. Now tell me about your game.
 Like hell you are. I know the kind of games you play. I'd be lucky to get out alive…
 Indeed. Indeed, old man! Spot on! Our game seems to be getting dangerous. That's why we're letting you in.
 Are you for real? Am I supposed to be proud?
 Nope, I'll pass. I've no plans to test my courage…
 It's hard and interesting… Or rather, it was, until a murderer joined it.
 What murderer?
 Yeah, let's get down to business.
 The murderer left some items tonight. From the Old Man. Bloody… something, and a scary note, saying they know we'll try to catch 'em, that we're reading it, that they see all.\nIt shook me in my boots!
 Where did you find those items?
 There are two caches nearby: the Dam and the Bowsprit. Go, and you'll see for yourself. \nOnly, if you take from a cache, leave something, too. Respect the rules, or it'll all go south.
 I do respect rules. I will follow them.
 The players already gather here in the Stone Yard. Next to the caches, I mean. They've already been to the Middle Town and the Earth. Maybe they found something there, too.\nI believe three parties are already here. They might know more… But I don't know where they are. I've been standing here waiting for you to pass by like an idiot.
 Thanks for waiting.
 All right… Let's play.
 Three groups of kids scattered across the Stone Yard, huh? Got it.
 The Dam… I think I've been there already. I'll take another look.
 The Bowsprit… You mean the cape, right? The Mistress' tombs? I think I've seen your cache. Didn't know it was a part of a game.
 She's dead. She was only terrifying while she lived.
 How do you even play this game?
 It's a game of trust. You'll figure it out as you play. And we'll figure <i>you</i> out.\nEveryone's wondering what the Old Man's replacement will be like.
 What makes you think I'll replace him?
 Fair enough.
 We sometimes get together in the Nutshell. It's like… a place. We go there in the evening, in the morning, even at noon. All in all, we come and go as we please.\nIf you get a lead, go to the Nutshell, will you? You'll find <i>someone</i> there. Eh?
 Eh.
 See you, kiddos.
 I got it, I got it. I'm quick on the uptake. Just telling you 'cause you wanted to know more about me.
 If you ever talk like that to me again, I'll spank you. Got it?
 Barley who?
 Well, there's this one… fella. Used to be Bad Grief's pal, but then they fell out… Barley split away and founded his own gang. A real, no-nonsense affair, unlike Grief's circus.\nWe would have suspected the man immediately, but we checked him already.
 All right. Anything else?
 Isn't leaving things voluntary? Your rules are yours, I don't have to follow them.
 Is it true you can talk to the dead?
 Can you… let me talk to my father?
 Fancy meeting you here… I was just looking for you!
 I'll return back to my place soon. That is where we'll talk.
 I'll be quick. I was just wondering...
 All right.
 They won't accept you either, khayaala?
 Don't they accept people from the Kin?
 They won't.
 It's not because we're Khatanghe. But Saburov thinks we're boös Vlad's people, and they have an arrangement. Be khara, they won't accept the Kains' people either.
 Be oylgono ougyb, why have you come? The Kin have never cooperated with the authorities.
 And so it will remain while you still think of yourselves as Olgimsky's slaves. It's not he who enslaved you. You enslaved yourselves.
 There's no work. The Factory is closed. Where should I go? How should I feed my children?
 This is not a real job, either… The patrols will be disbanded in a week.
 Aydahamne khүrene, the autumn will be rough.
 It's always been like this.
 Why do you keep it then?
 Well, that can be fixed.
 Really? Can you fix it? Did you have one of these as a kid?
 Oh, no… My toys were much simpler.
 No. But I can try.
 Fly brought it from some sort of dumpster. Looong ago. But now Fly lives in the Tower, and he doesn't come to visit anymore…
 Why aren't you in the Tower, too?
 Would you like me to fix it for you?
 I dunno… Lisa and Mew are here, so I'm here too… We're friends, after all.
 I understand. Friends are important.
 I see.
 This is our history. Its beginning and its current state.
 These are three different worlds in the palm of one hand.
 I sent my little rats to get groceries this morning, and they still haven't come back! I wonder if they think food will miraculously buy itself.
 Are you out of food?
 Have you been living under a rock, darling? Prices are soaring! Salt costs twice as much today as it did yesterday. And where's the grain? I haven't seen wheat in a week. Really, what could happen next?\nThere's <i>still</i> no train. People are worried. What if it never comes? We'll all starve!
 Why don't you get groceries yourself? More reliable than children.
 How can I be in all places at once? Hmm? I have to send the kids. They're probably at that Station of theirs. Thank the heavens they're not in the Tower, at least… I just don't have the heart to whip them.
 What station?
 We'll survive on meat. Olgimsky isn't entirely heartless. He won't let it come to starvation.
 It's a place they hang out, waiting on trains. Better than that damned tower.
 Why don't you go there and fetch them?
 Ha, right… If not for the Kains and the Saburovs, he'd hang himself before he shared anything with the people. You're as naive as a child.\nHmm… I wonder if I should go to the Station and get them…?
 Go where?
 I… don't want to meddle. No, it's all right. At least they're in town, staying close. My neighbor hasn't seen her children in… I don't know <i>how</i> long. That damned Tower took them all.
 Wonderful. I wonder how you cope with that.
 Hey, thanks for reminding me about the prices!
 Oh, I know that place. Back in my day, we liked the big Station more.
 Is she at her place, in the Lump?
 Damned if I know. Either there or at the Station. Just… don't stomp around if you ever go there. It's a discreet place, not for the grown-ups.
 The Station is a discreet place? Trains have become rare indeed…
 I won't stomp around. I'll just take a peek.
 I know, I grew up here.
 You should. It's pretty. Anyway, they thought you went to see the Judge. Kain, I mean. Georgiy.
 I know the Judge's name, thank you.
 They can wait a bit longer.
 No, they can't! Go there. They're doing it for you. You shouldn't keep them waiting. We're not your servants.
 I didn't say anything like that.
 I still have business to attend to.
 Capella said we can't go to the Nutshell until the evening. So we wait.
 The Nutshell? Why's it called that?
 Already forgotten.
 Because it's empty! Plus, it's close to the Station.
 You mean the passenger station?
 You kids really listen to Capella, don't you?
 So boring… How much longer do we have to wander the streets…
 Stop wandering, then.
 It's boring everywhere.
 Is that so? I didn't know. You… surprised me.
 Elaborate.
 I confess I don't know much about the Kains. Still, I believe that my father and your brother were as different as people can get.
 Why today?
 Those are the rules. The Judge's decision is executed on the same day it's made.
 But… why? This sounds inconvenient.
 Convenience is poison. One must accustom themselves to pursue any intention as soon as it appears, regardless of difficulty. Otherwise one burns out, gives in to doubt, starts fearing oneself. The bolder the dream, the more surely it becomes dust when the moment is lost.
 Now I understand.
 I'll never understand you. Your family, I mean.
 I didn't have any secrets from Father. It is strange that I wasn't aware of their friendship. Very strange.
 They both cared about the fate of our town. Your father was all about the people who live in the Lower Town. He wanted to protect the Kin. \nSimon basically invented our town… Designed it. Planned it out like a machine. A special space unlike any other. I think they were brought together by this shared responsibility for the future.
 Intriguing. May I ask you something else?
 I will answer a single question. First off, I am quite busy right now. Secondly, my brother wasn't too forthcoming to me concerning his relationship with your father. This was strange to me, too. \nCome visit me on Sunday, and I will tell you more.
 What was my father's plan for the Town?
 What was my father's plan for the Kin?
 Did Simon and my father disagree strongly on something?
 As far as I know, both of them were concerned about the Town turning out being too extraordinary. Such peculiar towns don't survive for long, just like peculiar people, or animals with rare mutations. An exotic flower won't last in the wild. Without people like Simon, your father, or myself, the Town won't stay the same.
 I understand. Thank you for your answer.
 I'll return on Sunday, then. Thank you. What about the house?
 The Kin are a part of the Town. We live in the age of machines and science. People achieved flight and perform more complex computations every year. \nThe Kin, however, belong to the primal times. Your people think and behave like people did thousands of years ago, when we were barely different from beasts. I hope you are not offended.
 Where does the Town come into this?
 I'll think about what you said.
 I don't get it. I didn't expect to, either.
 We would have examined it first. Its proportions, the taste of the space inside… Every house transforms everyone who spends more than five minutes within. Sometimes this transformation can be influenced or controlled. We have a great interest in these matters. 
 Our house has always been a gloomy place.
 Our house was just a house.
 Is that why you've built so many identical buildings?
 Exactly so. They're identical on the outside. We were interested in how much human presence could change them in return. It was an experiment in mirroring. A juxtaposition of natures. Do you want to ask me anything else?
 No.
 I do, but you seem busy. I'll ask at another time.
 Don't bother searching. Tycheek is dead. Although, I hear his daughter survived.
 That's what matters. I need to take care of her. Take her somewhere safe.
 On the other hand… Wait! Don't interrupt me. I'm thinking. Stand by.
 …
 ……
 ………
 Fine. Have it your way.\nI am relieving the guards. The gate will be unlocked. I think I know an even better way to play this card.
 Thank you.
 Well, that was brutally honest.
 I don't get it. How… you know what, never mind.
 Precisely.
 I'll go now.
 No. A question. Why are you here unguarded?
 I have a guard—a big one, too.
 Yeah? I haven't seen them around.
 It's not the kind of guard you can see. Any other questions?
 Is there a way to protect the Olgimskys? It's urgent.
 Has anyone tried to assassinate you here?
 Every day brings an attempt on my life. This whole damn mission is an attempt on my life. Have I not told you this already?\nBut I appreciate your support. If that's what this is.
 It <i>was</i> support…
 You're shrewd, huh.
 Actually, I do have a request. Vlad Olgimsky.
 To be honest… it's not my purpose, either. I keep forgetting that lately.
 Thanks for telling me that. It puts my mind at ease.
 I wonder!
 I'll have you know that they are free people. Free to do as they choose.
 One man can't order an entire people around.
 We both know that's not true.
 If you foresaw this, why did you not interfere?
 Fine. Arrest me, then.
 Divining? What are you talking about?
 So you haven't even heard? That explains a lot.\nWell, you're quite popular around these parts. I've interrogated several dozen people, and nearly a third pin their hopes on you.\nAnd every other person says that Old Burakh's heir is fated to drown the Town in blood. I believe that was foretold.
 Do you really believe that?
 I believe that a person's behavior is directly influenced by the few pieces of data that get stuck in their head.\nSelf-fulfilling prophecies. "Your children shall be kings," remember that?
 No, where is it from?
 Yes. Well, let them talk, and believe whatever they want.
 An old book.\nDo you realize that every step has already been foreseen and calculated? And I don't mean by myself. To be frank, your predestined future is not interesting enough to concern me.
 Can't say it bothers me.
 
 
 
 Sahba will teach us. She knows the way. She speaks to Earth. Mother Boddho talks to us through her.
 What will she teach you?
 What if she interprets it wrong? You know how it can be.
 She won't. Sahba is dead. And I'm to blame… I think that means I should answer your questions myself.
 She knows our traditions. We have long been oppressed. Now we face extinction. We forget our language, our crafts and arts. The art of talking to Earth, the language of herbs, the craft of Lines. She advises well.
 Well. Good luck remembering.
 What advising do you need?
 She won't advise you anymore.
 Impossible. It's not religious. Just wisdom. Mundane advice. Heart will tell if she's wrong, certainly, but Sahba rarely is.
 Oh… So she does make mistakes, after all.
 So she's a teacher to you?
 Not a simple one.
 I'm sure it's simpler than you think.
 That wasn't an offer, by the way. I'm a bad advisor.
 I have a question for our mother. \nThere is little time left before it all ends. When it happens, would I be allowed to spare the lives of those who trusted me and called themselves friends? Would I be allowed to not kill them?
 When what happens?
 Yes.
 When the Kin flood the town. When the steppe consumes the streets and houses. What shall I do to people, then?
 Are you all nuts? Just leave people alone.
 Kill everyone. God will tell the good from the bad.
 Dream on…
 I want to ask Sahba.\nWill our brothers and sisters be allowed to marry? The Kin are… well, kin. We're all children of Boddho. And there's so few of us left…
 Bad idea. Such marriages lead to degradation.
 Yeah… You should ask her.
 Marry the townsfolk. That's the only way to survive.
 We're too different.
 No, you're not.
 That's the idea.
 But that doesn't matter. When the Kin swallow the Town, there'll be neither wives nor children.
 …And you'll become the Kin's last generation.
 Dream on.
 I would ask Mother about self-sacrifice. \nShe said we must sacrifice everything for our fellow Kin, as we prepare to flood the Town… I gave everything I had, even my own entrails. Now I'm dying. Did I make the correct decision?
 …What for?
 Wisdom springs from hindsight…
 I will tell it to Sahba. It's a long story. I should save my strength.
 If you're asking me, it was a stupid thing to do.
 You did good.
 I want to abandon my name. So does my family: the etseg eyh, the abgay, the basaghan, the akshan.\nWhy would we need names? We're no one.
 How will you refer to each other, then?
 I agree. All names do is hinder communication.
 We do not need names to call on each other. We do not need words.\nI want to ask our mother if we'd lose anything vital by shedding names.
 You want to abandon your name, but you still refer to yourself with "I." Shouldn't you start with that?
 No. A name is just a shell. Peel it off.
 Your name <i>is</i> you. He who has it, has power over you.
 We want to ask our mother: How can we deny ourselves?\nMy body won't let me forget it. I can't stop loving myself while I still have a body.
 You can try to deny yourself if you want. But why stop loving yourself?
 Then shed your body.
 I don't know. But I can tell that it's a hindrance.\nI want to ask Sahba of this. Let her teach me.
 A curious question indeed.
 Go home. No one can teach you this.
 You don't truly love yourself, I can tell. Learn that first. Love is harder than denial.
 I want to ask our mother about our speech. This foreign tongue impedes us. It slows our minds. How can we refuse it?
 Speak the steppe tongue. Teleghyy yaakhav, naayze.
 Give a vow of silence and be quiet.
 You hear me not, bagshaah. I'm <i>thinking</i> with these words.\nI told you, it's my mind they cripple, not my mouth.
 Why don't you think in the language of your ancestors?
 In that case, how about you lend your brain to someone who'd use it?
 Tegdegh, bagshaa, but it's too bare. Too many new things in life, that have no names in the steppe tongue.
 So there's your answer, then.
 Invent new words. This is how you can serve our people.
 Ushkhaan
 Artemy
 Isidor
 Hюmhan
 Khooloy
 Amahn
 So you're here, after all?
 Didn't I tell you not to come here?
 Who locked us here? Are your friends playing some kind of awful prank?
 We're dead now. Do you think we'll get sick?
 Most likely.
 We'll see.
 Notkin
 Which department are you from, pal? Cutting?
 In a way.
 It's all because of the damned war. We are losing it. The train that came in June was the last, I just know it. We're not seeing another one.
 I've recently arrived from the outside. Trains still work.
 Seems like some sort of ugliness is happening inside.
 The crows perching directly on the Cathedral are a bad omen.
 Why?
 The crows not being noticed by anyone is a bad omen.
 What kind of omen is that?
 The crows being so numerous this year are a bad omen. Sayn baina, khayaala. How fares your kine?
 Numerous indeed. A beautiful sight, huh?
 
 
 Home is where your friends—your <i>tagloor</i>—are. I wonder how Lara is doing.
 
 
 Without me, our childhood gang—Lara, Grief, and Rubin—ended up barely talking to one another.\n\nPerhaps I can gather everyone back together again? Lara doesn't mind, but what about the other two?
 
 
 I invited Rubin to gather our childhood gang again. He doesn't mind.
 I invited Stakh to our childhood gang meeting. I wonder if he'll come.
 
 
 I invited Rubin to gather our childhood gang again. He doesn't mind.
 I invited Rubin to gather our childhood gang again. I wonder if he'll come.\n
 
 
 I invited Grief to gather our childhood gang again. He doesn't mind.
 I invited Grief to meet old friends. We'll see if he comes…
 
 
 Lara, Bad Grief, Rubin, and I are meeting after midnight in the old place. I hope we can connect again.
 We were planning to gather our childhood gang at the old place, but now is not a good time for nostalgia. \n\nI guess I should apologize to Lara.
 
 
 Perhaps old friendships can be mended… but our lives will never be the same again.
 Perhaps old friendships can be mended, but even that doesn't seem to work out… In any case, our lives will never be the same again.
 …You've got a shmowder on you.
 So what?
 Fancy yourself a healer already? Have you mastered the potions your father made? You haven't even found his tools yet!
 I have, actually. They're out of order.
 It's not a toy. It's poison!\nLet me tell you a story. Several years ago, these kids were playing plague. They gathered a pile of pills, ground them up and mixed them… That's where shmowders came from. \nThen, a terrible outbreak happened. Some people believed children's shmowders helped. But they couldn't have! That was their desperation talking!
 I see.
 Do we have time for that?
 Can't you fix them…?
 I can. But getting them to work will take time, and the kid needs help right now.
 A little. Unless someone interferes, he'll die at seven o'clock.
 How do you know?
 No. I used that "shmowder" of yours. I'm not sure it'll work.
 A shmowder? A shmowder?!\nWell… It <i>will</i> work all right. But it only helps with the sand pest, not with any other diseases. And it's dangerous. It can even kill a weak organism… Ugh… You shouldn't have.
 Well, excuse me for giving him whatever I had. So what did that Bachelor want with me?
 We've been cut off from the world, all alone. Food supplies are dwindling. I'm not even talking about medicine—where are we to get more? \nAnd now our only competent doctor is gone. This winter will be the end of our town.
 We'll survive, just like everyone else does.
 It's not like we're on an island in the middle of the ocean.
 That's exactly how it is.
 Oh, come on…
 Perhaps.
 A train with goods will come eventually.
 Agnia
 The Judge is in his workshop, around the corner. But I can tell you his answer right now: "Yes, you may."
 I may what?
 You may slay the outlaws at night without repercussions. You're the fifth to come and ask about that.
 And why have you come?
 I'm wondering if my man is going to come and ask the same. If he's genuinely planning to kill the killers. If he is, I'm leaving. Today.
 I admire your resolve.
 Tenegh. Foolish boy.
 I know the meaning of the word. Why the harsh words, abgai?
 I hope you're right… But the coming winter will be harsh, mark my words. \nIn times like these, it becomes apparent just how childish we are. So dependent on that umbilical cord, on the noble families. Without them, we're done for. Our town can't stand on its own… It can feed others, but can't support itself.
 That's true.
 We have cows and we have bulls, not to mention stores of meat in the Warehouses.
 There's always room for change. Let the child crawl, and after a couple of head bumps it will be running around.
 When threatened, people tend to get their shit together. Maybe towns are like that too.
 Did you see what's happening on your porch?
 I don't have to look to know, my boy… I can work out the details just fine. The noise is hard to ignore, too. I'm not deaf. All of this does not concern you.
 Why did you shut down the Factory?
 That's where you're wrong. It does concern me. Being a doctor in a town where two thirds of the people are unemployed is…
 Do you have any idea how much I lose after every single day of downtime? If I've stopped the Factory, that means I've had very good reasons for doing so! \nMind your test tubes and surgical instruments, Master Burakh… And keep your nose out of my affairs. I handle my business just as well as you handle yours… You mind that!
 So why do the Kains want my family home?
 Look who's here… Lara says, you were planning a sentimental get-together? Remembering the good old days and all that? As if, what, six years haven't passed?
 Don't suppose we have a time for a get-together now.
 I got the idea before… all this.
 Why so angry though? Yes, I was planning to gather you all. But no one was forcing anyone.
 Well, I guess the sentimental bout with old friends is cancelled. Time to work.
 Drop that sarcasm, will you?
 Is it an either-or thing for you? Work doesn't have to interfere with friendship.
 Are you planning to work days <i>and</i> nights? Right…
 Shee yuunde yereebshe, why are you back? Or do you have the money?
 I do. Hand over the bull.
 I'll bring it to your doorstep.
 I don't live where my father used to.
 The Khatangher know where you live. Sahba-ötün speaks to her people. They need a menkhu, so they need to know how to find you.
 Oh, Sahba… She shouldn't have.
 Nah. I just wanted to take one more look at a talking bull.
 Fair enough. I can't walk around with a bull, after all.
 And please clean it up before you bring it to me.
 Sayn bayna, hello, noukherne! See, I brought your bull. Cleaned it up, too. We Khatanghe never swindle one another.
 Yamar berkhe. Good job!
 I hope it <i>does</i> talk one day. So you say it'll warn me of danger?
 It will, noukherne. You believed me, and for that, you'll be rewarded. Mother Boddho and Suok be my witnesses.
 Don't mention Suok in vain, noukher. It's not a name to say randomly.
 Bayarlaa, khayaala. Thank you. I'll call it "Lucky find."
 Ukherney yereed bayna gyy? Huh? Why are you leaving?
 Go, go. And take the goddamn bull with you.
 The bull told me to. It said, this is my last chance. If I don't leave today, I'll die in four days.\nI believe it.
 …All right, have it your way. I'll buy it.
 Bayarlaa. You won't regret this.
 I hope it <i>does</i> talk one day. So you say it'll warn me of danger?
 Well, I don't. And neither should you. How do you plane to survive alone in the steppe? The winter is at hand.
 All I want is for you to get off my back, nүnekhen zayla!
 You're mistaken, pal. I'm not a worker. I'm a doctor.
 Trying to reach Big Vlad?
 That fat pig refuses to come out. Refuses even an explanation. Bloodsucker.
 What happened?
 Good. We get a lot of workplace accidents. We need a doctor. At least if he's like old Burakh, God rest his soul: Turning his nose at nothing and not trying to swindle three days' payment out of you for a single examination.
 What is this crowd?
 You're a talker. A taskmaster, I suppose?
 Brave words. Would you have the guts to repeat that to his face?
 Enough! We've been silent for too many years, and where did it get us? To the brink of starvation. Our patience runs thin!
 So what happened this time?
 The Factory shut down two days ago, didn't you know? I mean, yeah, there is this soot problem…\nBut when will it run again? How many of us will find themselves on the streets? Will anyone pay us for the downtime, or will the payment be reduced? I can tell you right now it's the latter! And that won't feed my children!
 Yeah…
 We want <i>at least</i> to be told what's going on! Why is the train not coming? Why did he cork up the Termitary? I'll tell you why! They want it all shut down! They're just looking for an excuse to close the Factory!\nThere was no accident, and the toxic soot is a lie, a cover, a crock of shit!
 Perhaps.
 Closing the Bull Enterprise? I don't think so. We produce so much meat… Everyone needs to eat.
 Were you born yesterday, pal? What do you know? People are illiterate here, no fancy schools, but they still think faster than you. The state has one leg in the grave. Things are going downhill so quickly, we can't even end this bloody war.\nIt won't end well…
 It'll be fine.
 Nothing ever ends well.
 Are you going to see the man yourself? Tell him we ain't leaving without an answer. More people will come. We'll stay here for as long as we have to.\nLet the hateful pig tell us the truth.
 All right. I'll tell him.
 But he's the one creating that work in the first place. Isn't he?
 Work… It's serfdom, not work! We're not cattle, we're people! And we deserve to be treated as such!
 And what do you want?
 You go ahead and stay here. Perhaps it will bear fruit.
 Actually, I agree that it doesn't look well. Too many strange things happening. And they all align…
 There have been, indeed, many suspicious coincidences.
 Prompter
 
 
 Some evenings, kids gather at the Station.
 
 
 Sometimes, after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place… Not just them, either.
 Sometimes, after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place… Not just them, either. Even if Sahba's not around anymore, her place remains.
 
 
 Some evenings, kids gather at the Station.
 
 
 Some evenings, kids gather at the Station.
 
 
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place... and not just them.
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place... and not just them. Even if Sahba's not around anymore, her place is.
 
 
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place... and not just them.
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place... and not just them. Even if Sahba's not around anymore, her place is.
 Hatchling
 Lefty
 
 
 Sometimes, after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place… Not just them, either.
 Sometimes, after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place… Not just them, either. Even if Sahba's not around anymore, her place remains.
 
 
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place... and not just them.
 Sometimes after dark, steppe people meet at Sahba's place... and not just them. Even if Sahba's not around anymore, her place is.
 
 
 Some evenings, kids gather at the Station.
 
 
 Some evenings, kids gather at the Station.
 Goldfinch
 Ace
 Pup
 Tatochka
 A guest is best when you see them less.
 Is this a bad moment?
 I've got enough on my plate.
 Will you tell me?
 No. Long tongues lead to short lives. If you have a point, get to it; if not, don't let the door hit you on the way out.
 We're getting together this night. The four of us. The old place.
 A murder of crows, huh?
 They sense trouble.
 Well?
 Why are you here?
 I think I should go. I've a lot of work to do.
 I didn't expect you to come.
 Work.
 What kind of work can you possibly be doing at this place?
 Moonlighting as an architect? Or a philosopher, perhaps?
 I'll have you know this house is in mourning, too. Simon Kain died the same night as my mentor. And I am a pathoanatomist, if you didn't know. It's my main area of expertise.
 I didn't. How was I to know?
 It roughly translates as "the most reasonable and friendly."
 Forget Stakh. I see now that I'm one step away from falling out with <i>you.</i> Why?
 I'm sorry. Forget it.\nIt's just that sometimes you feel, all too poignantly, that your life is over. You're not even thirty, but you're done. Not dead, but burnt through… and there's nothing ahead for you.
 But what does it have to do with me?
 Nothing. Not now, anyway. It's just… it could have gone differently.
 Yes. It could have.
 That's all right. It won't take you two even a year to reconcile. Like you have a choice…
 That's some strategic thinking. Measuring life in years.
 A year more, a year less… I may even live to be a hundred years old. So what?
 What's wrong with you, Lara?
 …Perhaps the four of us should meet today? Even Bad Grief? Like the good old days.
 Then again… Indeed… You're right. Let's do it. The four of us. Grief included. Today. The old place—the Apple Road, right? By midnight, as usual?
 Precisely. The Apple Road, by the Basket.
 …All I wanted was to see if you were okay. See you, Lara.
 Yes. The night will be clear.
 I mean, it's better than your place… It's too gloomy here.
 Grief? You've no idea what quagmire Grief has gotten himself in… And Stakh? He's also done something awful… The Judge is angry at him. He summoned him to the Crucible for questioning! He's still here—what does that even mean, huh?\nOh, the three of you deserve each other!
 Let's gather together, huh? The four of us? I mean it. I'll arrange everything.
 I'm overjoyed to see you too.
 You're a… what? Where did you even learn that?
 Your father. And I'd obviously prefer if the Kin didn't know that. They've had it for me for a while now.
 What for?
 Forget it. Are you here about Simon's body as well? You're a bit late—I performed the autopsy on the same day. And on the next day the body went missing.
 The hell? Was it stolen? By whom? And what for?
 Whoa… You're in big trouble, friend.
 Maybe the two of us should go looking for it.
 I've already convinced the Judge that it wasn't my fault. I am, after all, a pathoanatomist, not a guard. \nThe Kains have enough people. They'll find it. So it's not our problem anymore.
 Anyway, I actually came here looking for you.
 Why?
 We want to gather this evening. At the old place.
 Then why are you here?
 Maria, the Kains' daughter, wanted to talk. And when she wants something, you don't argue. She took after Nina, if you know what I mean. Maria probably wants to discuss Simon… So here I wait.
 Got it. By the way, I came here looking for you.
 By the Basket?
 Yes, by the Basket.
 Touching. Bad Grief included?
 Yes. He is.
 We'll see who comes.
 Why do you have to be so cranky? Go swim in the Gorkhon! Perhaps it'll cool your head!
 Heard you loud and clear. And now excuse me, but I need to prepare for a tough conversation.\nJust… wait a second. Tell me: Reconciling everyone was, of course, Lara's idea?
 Why do you care? See you. Good luck with Kaina.
 Yes, it was Lara's.
 Grief is the one who's truly hurt. It was ugly of you two to turn away from him.
 No, Stakh. It was mine.
 Oh, I'm sorry. <i>Clearly</i> you're terribly busy here.
 What's wrong with everyone today? Are you trying to drive me nuts?
 Indeed, I <i>am</i> busy. Business doesn't make itself, oh, someone spins the gears.
 What's wrong?
 Yeah? Well, to hell with you!
 Huh? Why all of a sudden?
 Well, we haven't seen each other in a while.
 Because it's time we stopped bickering.
 We can mend our old friendship. I'm sure we can.
 The old place, as in by the Gumstone? At the railroad?
 Yes. Next to the Basket.
 Yes. The Apple Road, remember?
 …Go ahead. The three of you will have more fun without me.
 No, we won't.
 Me and Stakh are at each other's throats, too. He can barely stand me. Blames me for Father's death.
 Wow. What tree did he fall from to hurt his head so? Must have been that new tower.
 Precisely…
 Well, he's right, in a way. I can't stop thinking about it.
 I don't know, Cub… I've got a full plate here. Those men, the night hunters, they're too fond of playin' with knives. Way too fond… Where'd they all even come from?
 The ones cutting people?
 It's not just your plate. It's everyone's, now.
 Not my fault. But… somehow, it is. Never took blood, but I dressed for a red harvest. How it bloomed…\nForget it. I'll deal with it myself.
 Just come to our old place. Did you hear me? Please come. No one will blame you.
 So, take this chance to explain it to Stakh and Lara… and me.
 We'll figure it out together. I won't abandon you.
 There weren't so many crows in town before, were there?
 Listen. Do you want to talk about the merry knife men? The night hunters.
 Huh?
 What will you do with the cutthroats?
 What can I even do? Pretend I'm still their leader to their face, then disown 'em around polite society? Already on it. What else is there?
 I think you need to pick a side.
 It's too late for me, Cub. I've only got one road ahead of me now.\nPerhaps the outbreak is for the best… Plagues are like fires, people forget old scores. And all hell will break loose here soon.
 Any dark prophecies to share? You're the criminal mastermind here, after all.
 So the outbreak makes you happy, huh?
 No need to prophesize. People fear hunger. Even honest workers will turn their hatchets and hammers to crime. Burglin' houses, lootin' corpses, guttin' each other.\nThey will. <i>Oh, they will.</i>
 Not all of them, Grief. Not all.
 Nope. It was all sparrows before. And larks. And a fair share of starlings.
 Where did they all go to, I wonder? It's all crows now…
 Heed my wisdom: We're all in for it. It only took them as little as yesterday to start cuttin' folks… Means they'll soon go completely an' absolutely off their rocker.\nPeople get used to death all too quick.
 Bite your tongue.
 So what will you say to your thugs, then?
 They're no longer mine, Cub. Mine are all at my side. Although… hell, why pretend? Not all of them. Not all of them are mine anymore.\n…And then there were none.
 What are you planning to do?
 It's up to you, pal. But you won't last long, not this way.
 We'll see.
 The turf's so dry, you don't even need a match—a glare would start a fire.\nAnd when the Kin bares its teeth, that's when we'll all dance! They're slow on the start, but oh so fast on the draw! The Master likes them mute and obedient, but apathy makes them that way, not stupidity. They're only obedient till the time comes.\nAnd here it comes.
 Big words…
 Kids are hiding in this yard. I should go seek them out.
 Murmuring can be heard from this house.
 I'm afraid your father… might be aware.
 ...With your kind help, I take it?
 It's not my fault you share the same name!
 Is it really that bad?
 "V. O."... Vlad Olgimsky?
 "V. O."... Vlad Olgimsky?
 "V. O."... Vlad Olgimsky?
 The cemetery is crowded. I suspect these people came to bury Father.
 Bad Grief doesn't seem interested in old friendship. His loss! I'm not going to play mother hen, rounding them all up.
 …Scared, aren't you, brother?
 You're right.
 And the people who lose their jobs? They won't be too fond of staying home. They'll find new hobbies, like looking for food, or venting their anger.\n…And Fat Vlad shut his facilities down the day before yesterday, didn't he? Crafty… Didn't whisper so much as a single word to me. Do you think he knew?
 Who knows…
 No, I doubt it.
 I think he might have suspected. Perhaps that's why he locked the Termitary, to protect the workers.
 If it's the same sand pest we saw five years ago, we're all finished. There was no salvation from it. Every single person in the Crude Sprawl died. \nYour father was fast enough to lock the doors back then, so it died there. Only reason we're still alive. Now we can't even lock the gate… an' there's no one to lock it, either.
 He made a hard choice. Perhaps if he had more time, he could've found a better solution…
 Oh, stop whining. I promise you'll be all right.
 Thanks for sharing your opinion. Now shove it up your ass.
 Calm down.
 Neither did I. But I don't regret it. I've regained my strength a bit. This place… It's good. I've already forgotten what the steppe is like.
 What's that train car over there? I don't remember it before.
 Damned if I know… I think someone lives there. A kid, maybe. I saw a ball there in the rails. Kids often gather around these parts. Not everyone is fond of that Polyhedron. Not everyone fits there.
 You've got a keen eye, noticing a ball in this dark.
 Not everyone fits? You mean they're filtering someone out?
 I don't know. I've no idea how to deal with children. Never had.
 Even when you were one yourself.
 Same here.
 Why yes, I can't complain. I do have a good eye.
 …Looking the wrong way, unfortunately.
 …Ugh. Forget it. Enough idle chatter. Yes, I am angry with you. And you ought to understand why.
 You said the Kin were after you. Do they have a good reason?
 Your kind doesn't take kindly to cutting bodies. And cutting bodies is my job.\nMy mentor… I mean, your father… You know what he meant for the Kin. He did have that right, kind of, but still… I was the one they demonized. And that's fine. I don't mind.
 Oh… I'm beginning to understand now.
 But how did Father allow it?
 And who would herd your kind, otherwise? Fat Vlad? Your elders?\nHe had a hard job. And he did operate, when he absolutely had to. But bodies require autopsy. You know it as well as I. Pathoanatomy is the foundation of our art. A science.
 You truly were a loyal apprentice to him.
 It's not anger, pal. It's jealousy. Let go of it, will you? It's ridiculous.
 So you don't venture into the steppe often?
 I'm unwelcome here. Your kind is better left alone. They don't appreciate my company.
 Huh. I don't remember you ever being afraid of anyone that much.
 So you see me as part of the Kin, now? Does that make it easier to hate me?
 You know… Perhaps you're right. You're anything but stupid, Cub. You've always been a good judge of character. For all the good that's done anyone…
 What do you mean?
 Go, Stakh. Go. Make us all feel ashamed.
 Fine. It's not my place to judge you. And neither is it yours to judge me.
 So you dig up dead Khatanghe from down below? Not a brilliant move…
 No one came.
 We did. Isn't that enough?
 I expected as much. The gatherings of old friends seem inappropriate now…
 Isn't it obvious? Any old grudges pale in comparison to this sort of catastrophe.
 Tragedies like this bring people together. Ought to, anyway. So it did to us…
 I feel like this plague will become a great weaver, mending that which was broken.
 I disagree. The outbreak will sow discord. It will tear apart friends, families…\nIt wasn't the plague that got us together. It was you.
 You don't have to.
 If not for the plague, no one would change their mind.
 No. It was all you. Your will.\nYou've done really well, Cub. You swallowed your pride and the wrongs done to you… You weren't ashamed to vouch for Grief. I don't think I could've done the same.
 Come on… You were always the thread that held us together.
 About what is in store for us all?
 No. About each other.
 Well, that's good to hear. I hoped you would. Did the three of you make peace?
 The last hug before the flood comes?
 We'll protect each other. And we'll try to survive. Yes?
 Of course.
 What do you know of this disease? They're calling it "sand pest." You know why?
 Why "sand"?
 Because it makes your skin dry like sand. People still believe it came from below the ground. All those fairy tales of an earthen golem, a clay-legged shabnak… You know…
 Nonsense.
 I know nothing, except that there was an outbreak before.
 What about your father? Has he maybe left any notes…?
 Three scribbled pages, some drawings on the walls… No. Nothing.
 It mowed down everyone in that poor district last time. No survivors. Every single person got infected, every single person died. Does this mean there's no hope?
 Perhaps there isn't. So what? The most important things inside us need not rely on hope.
 I hope you don't mean the internal organs.
 It's good that you still have the sense of humor.
 We'll try. By the way… do you know why all the Stations were shut down? Both the Cargo and the Passenger Stations. Has it been long?
 The Passenger Station was shut down a year ago. Cargo, only recently. In the summer. \nThere was some sort of a renewal project… Remember how enthusiastic they were about building new railroads before the war? …Were you also there, on the front?
 Served as a medic for a while. Nothing interesting.
 No, of course I wasn't. I'd make a terrible soldier…
 <i>Of course</i> I mean the organs. Like there's anything else I could be talking about…
 Hope is the only thing that stands between us and ending it all every evening.
 I prefer not to think about it. I need to concentrate on my work. What is to come, will come.
 Sticky
 So, I cleaned our place up. I burned the trash, took away the bones—I mean, the cracked ones, and I put that weird grey goo from the table in a bucket. Might be useful, right?
 "Our place"? Did I hear you right?
 Just who the hell do you think you are?
 No rest for the wicked, huh?
 I can also whip up something for us to eat. Got any money?
 You whippersnapper… What am I supposed to do with you?
 Don't you dare.
 No money for you. I'll go home and make everything myself.
 Anyway, when are you coming back? Should I wait for you or what? Someone's gotta take care of your dad's stuff, and… stuff. I think it would be great if we did it together.
 No. No no no. No "together." Didn't I tell you not to touch anything?
 Why do you care anyway?
 By the way, I, uh… broke a pipe over there. I don't think it was important though. So don't hit me, all right? I'll fix it myself.\nBoar has a pipe like that. I bet he'll trade it for a bottle of alcohol. We have a couple of those, right?
 No trading anything!
 No fixing anything!
 Just… just stay here and don't go anywhere. Don't even move. Got it?
 Got it.
 Good, kiddo. Great. Keep it up.
 Don't worry, pal. Crows have the right to be devout too.
 For the Kains, every building is a machine, making something for humans… or with them. For example, this Cathedral has nothing to do with religion. There is a grim joke circulating around, claiming that the Cathedral makes time.
 Makes time for what?
 Do the Kains mean it for real?
 Yeah, I've heard.
 Just <i>makes it.</i> Produces it.\nThe Kains lay out their buildings in such a way that they change the perception and worldview of those inside them.\nI guess Simon wanted people feel the flow of time differently inside the Cathedral, so that's how he planned the building… But then rumors simplified the idea.
 All right. But how are crows at fault?
 Funny.
 They slow time down. The Kains rush it ahead, they refuse to sit on their hands. Complacency and laziness are the worst sins in their book. Slow time is tantamount to death for them…\nBut those are just silly rumors.
 I, on the other hand, don't like being rushed.
 It's not just the Kains. I like it when time itself hurries me up.
 I don't notice them either. Even the cawing has become a background noise, like a sea splashing.
 A real one. Crows are harbingers of death. Whoever doesn't notice crows, will die soon.\nWe've been standing here for a while. Many many many people passed us by… The three of us were the only ones who stopped to look.
 The four of us.
 The three. There are three of us. Oh… Yes. Four.
 Seems like you're behind on your arithmetic. Study better.
 Whichever you prefer. Three is fine by me.
 That's ominous.
 How fares your kine, khayaala. Let Mother Boddho caress your step.
 With us, Khatanghe, all omens seem to be death omens. And no one cares! I don't think I've ever met a people so indifferent.
 Beautiful indeed! Yamar goe bee! Still, as an omen, it's bad.
 Why?
 When crows are numerous, they're waiting for carrion. And what can we give them? Our bodies feed Mother Boddho, the Earth. Why feed crows? Aydahamne khүrene, that would be like giving yourself to the sky. \nYou know it's a bad way to go. And so the omen is ill.
 Tenegh! Bite your tongue! You don't know what you're saying.
 Evils always passed us by, and so it will now. Bayartay, khayaala.
 Let them wait. They'll get nothing.
 They, uh… I believe they already gave you the key to the lair where the Old Man had worked. Does it… does it mean I have to leave? Can I stay, maybe?
 Did you live there?
 No… It's my workplace.
 Right.
 Yeah. You have to leave.
 …Old man, can I stay? I want to be a doctor. I'll help you! I'll work!
 Some worker you are…
 Can I please stay? Pretty please with sugar on top!
 I have a sugar intolerance. But I'll think about it.
 Fine, we'll manage together… I can't just throw you out, can I?
 No. I don't need one more burden. I have enough responsibilities as it is.
 Me? A burden? You're a burden! I've never been one! I've known how to get around since I was a tiny kid! I'm an orphan, got it?
 An orphan? I see. So here we are now, two orphans.
 No means no.
 Who are you?
 They call me Sticky. I've no idea why.
 Why don't you live home?
 I don't have a home. I'm an orphan.
 So you stayed at my father's workshop?
 You know what? Go to the Shelter. It's a house by the river in the Flank. Lara Ravel lives there, she'll take you in.
 Who are you calling old?
 Just don't hit me, okay? Well… you can, but only for a good reason. Deal?
 Who are we operating on today, doctor?
 Persistent, aren't you? Sticking like a leech…
 I don't hit children. So don't hit me either… or I might break.
 Says who?
 Is that how you were taught to heal people? Be khara, you just got lucky. Anyone can administer a remedy someone else made. A child might pick medicine by pretty colors! Be oylgono ugyb, this is not your father's way!
 Boleesh, boleesh, bүү alysh… You're right to shame me. This will not happen again. I will learn.
 Maybe my way is different from my father's. It's up to me to decide, khetey!
 You're not planning on giving it to Patches, right? It might kill him, you know.
 You think I'm insane? It's not medicine, just a thing kids play with.
 How do you know?
 I can sense that foul stench a mile away.
 You got me, I've got a shmowder. What now?
 I'm not. I'll treat him with normal medicine.
 Calm down. I believe you.
 Not to mention they're terrible for your health! You know the only time people eat a pile of random pills? When they want to kill themselves! You don't even know what it's made of.\nLeave the boy alone. If you're so keen on poisoning someone, eat it yourself.
 Calm the hell down.
 Not now. But perhaps one day I will test one on myself.
 Trust me, please. We have time, at least until seven. Go and prepare the right medicine. \nIt's not like I know anything about your father's craft. It's just that I feel that you need to do as he did. To do otherwise will invite great sorrow.
 There's no time. I'll have to guess. By the way, why are you even here?
 How do you know?
 I have a gift for seeing things.
 You're weird, you know that? And yet, somehow, this once, I genuinely want to trust you.
 …Notkin wouldn't let me.
 I wonder why…
 Why, I wonder?
 I wanted to help.
 Why didn't you, then?
 They don't believe in me. They don't believe I'm a miracle worker… As they have believed, so shall it be done for them. But then why should the boy suffer?
 He shouldn't.
 I'll take care of him myself. Maybe something will come of it.
 I wouldn't trust you with my life either.
 How about you just… don't? You'll only make it worse. You… what'll you do, cut his heart out? Ripper…
 No. I have another idea.
 I'll do it my father's way. He could cure without cutting.
 I'd rather cut out yours. I'm curious about it.
 "We have time"? Can't you help him now? Don't you have healing hands, or something? 
 All right, I'm convinced. Sit tight, I'll be back soon.
 Are you well yourself? You must be dead tired.
 It's not like you to care about my well-being.
 Do you think I'm out to cheat or swindle you? You hate me. Everyone hates me. It's okay, I'm used to being hated… but that doesn't make me the villain. \nTrust your heart, not your head. What do you think of me?
 Nah, I don't hate you. You have a good heart, I think.
 I'm not going to lie—I could use some rest.
 You gotta stay awake until nightfall. Today is very, very, very important. It's going to be hard to stay awake, but you can make it. Coffee staves off sleep. Want some?
 A gift? From you? You must be joking.
 Sure.
 You're trying to swindle me right now.
 How do I put it… You're weird. Suspicious. And always different.
 Thanks, sister.
 The Judge sure puts a lot of trust in the townsfolk.
 If somebody you know is planning to murder a person, even a villain… then there's something wrong with them. And I've seen a few red flags already…
 Be careful at night. There's no guarantee your boyfriend doesn't join the outlaws instead.
 He's probably just trying to protect you.
 Thanks a lot. Now I'm feeling ashamed of myself.
 Enough chitchat. To the left, around the corner?
 By the way, what is this strange… mold, I guess? Is it mold? That thing your house is covered in? Do houses get scabs around these parts?
 I don't know. Never seen these before.
 And by the way, what is this strange… mold, I guess? Is it mold? That thing your house is covered in? Do houses often get scabs around these parts?
 I don't know. Never seen these before.
 What mold? What on earth are you talking about?
 They're lentigines. I've seen stranger things around here.
 What mold? What on earth are you talking about?
 They're lentigines. I've seen stranger things around here.
 Tidy Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "He doesn't know about the Station, I'm sure. So it's safe. Gingers allowed today."
 Worker
 "Found the last walnut. Hidden in the Tadpole Yard. Meet you there."
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Dusty Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "She left the Nutshell. The house is ours again, crafting in the evening as usual."
 Warm Note
 
 What are you doing here?
 I… got here by accident. Lost my way.
 Out. Now.
 How rude.
 Who are you?
 What are you doing here?
 One more word from you and everything will break. I told you to get lost. Are you stupid?
 No, I hear you loud and clear.
 Just wondering how you survived this long with manners like those.
 Dividing power. You're not required.
 Mind your manners, girl.
 Who knows…
 Maria Kaina
 Even in a handcrafted town like this, there is an underground, a rat's nest. At odds with the law. At odds with good morals. People come to them with dubious challenges and requests.
 Just say it out loud: They're thieves.
 Who are you?
 A Reflection. Call me his conscience, if you will.
 Grief's?
 I always knew Bad Grief's conscience was somewhere around… Yet still separate from the guy himself.
 You know my master. He is your friend, and he hasn't changed much since you last saw him. He always loved to live on the edge. Never was a stickler for rules.\nBut he was never truly vile or cruel.
 Yet he <i>has</i> changed.
 And here I thought…
 He wants to seem a kingpin, a king; a local tzar of his own small turf. Wants to <i>seem,</i> not <i>be.</i> Play a big wheeler-dealer.\nBut that's not who he really is. He's just…
 …Playing pretend? Don't make me laugh.
 Thieves and rats never tolerate false leaders. Are you telling me they're all just playing war here?
 He's worried that blood started to spill now. And it was probably spilled by his men. The people who rubbed shoulders with him, hiding their teeth at first…\nHe's worried you'll think he has it all under control, meaning today's craze is his doing.
 Isn't it?
 How do you know he even has a conscience?
 Such is our town. You know it yourself: It's a very good village. Beautiful people live here, infusing it with a very spiritual dream. There's no real, villainous crime here. Even the rats and the thieves are softer.
 Yeah, right…
 Dreams live in the Upper Town, not here. Closer to the Bridge Square…
 I am his Reflection. Who else is to know what his heart is worried about?
 Touching.
 Perhaps he is partially responsible. Perhaps he did corrupt them with his talk of how any law is but chains that one must break in order to become free and truly human…\nBut he never wanted bloodshed. Keep that in mind.
 Thanks, Reflection. That's comforting to know.
 So the fellow bit off more than he can chew. We'll see where it leads.
 Would you like to know what your old friend is truly worried about now? He's playing a dashing scoundrel in front of you, but his soul is trembling.
 Well, why?
 His soul has very good reasons to tremble. Don't bother going into detail.
 
 
 Time to get the hell away from here, right?
 Indeed. Follow me.
 Well, you can stay if you wish.
 When did you…? Was it that House of Death thing?
 The driver of the train I arrived by.
 Yeah? And what did he look like?
 Like… a normal person.
 Ordinary height. Ordinary complexion. Looks like a worker, maybe.
 …Like a good third of the Town's men. Damn it.
 So how do we look for him, I wonder? The normal, ordinary one?
 …Damn it.
 Why not the Town Hall, though? Then again… it doesn't matter.
 The local authorities seem to have promised all doctors payment from a public Fund.
 I took my Fund reward. The next payment is no sooner than tomorrow.
 The Fund has a reward for me.
 The Fund has nothing for me today.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I took my Fund reward. Next payment is no sooner than tomorrow.
 The Fund has a reward for me.
 The Fund has nothing for me today.
 Urmaan
 Kestrel
 Onlooker
 Loy
 Loy
 I don't even <i>have</i> a doorstep.
 Then I'll bring it to you when you find one.
 How will you know where I'll find a place? From the bull, too?
 <i>If</i> I find one.
 Grigory's Reflection
 Mishka
 
 
 
 
 The door locked behind us. According to the legend, I need to inspect the house and light up all candles I can find. Or wait until dawn.
 The door opened up. Whatever it was, it's gone now. Now I need to grab the boys and leave this place.
 
 
 
 …Scared? I'm just estimating how they're gonna look. Don't you worry, for now… For now, they're still right as rain. But the countdown has started, so to speak.\nThey're the most <i>delicious</i> piece to me… The most interesting morsels.
 What do you want?
 Shut up. And put this away!
 Oh, I'm more about putting things <i>under</i>. So, sorry if I can't oblige… Will you forgive me? Oh, pretty, pretty please?
 Just get lost.
 Who are you?
 I only want to play hide-and-seek. I am, after all, playing with you all. Hide-and-seek, tag. Dice. Tic-tac-toe. Love my x's and o's… So keep in mind: Ready or not, here I come.
 They're from a list I got from my father. I won't let you have them.
 Where's the Eighth?
 The Eighth will be a hassle. But I think I'll manage, in nine days or so. Maybe faster. Who knows.
 Get lost.
 I'll be faster.
 Orderly
 What once was a theatre of comedy is now an anatomy theatre. 
 It was a theatre of tragedy.
 So, what do we do?
 I… don't know. I guess we can try lighting candles, like in that urban legend of yours.
 Each day will bring new jobs. For you and for us.\nYou work here in the hospital; we crawl around houses looking for corpses. God knows which is worse…
 So you're an orderly?
 So I am. At least while I'm wearing these rags. Such are our orders.
 Looks gorgeous.
 Do these costumes really offer protection?
 Doesn't your work require… hands?
 I guess. \nI don't envy you, working with the doomed and dead. But you will have <i>some</i> support.\nThere, deep on the stage, to the left of you—is a closet, see? You'll find medicine inside. Replenished every day. You're free to grab and use it.
 Every day? Sounds good.
 God, the smell here…
 Your work is worse.
 Nothing is worse than hospitals, not to mention theatres.
 They're not doomed yet.
 Someone is selling a revolver over here. Three thousand. He won't wait forever, though.
 
 
 There is an unusual contraption here. It's out of order. I'll need two chunks of metal scrap and two springs to fix it.
 
 
 Father's contraption is out of order. I'll need a chunk of metal scrap and a good spring to fix it.
 
 
 The contraption in the den can be used to produce herbal infusions and tinctures.
 
 
 The contraption in the den can be used to produce herbal infusions and tinctures.
 Someone owes Sticky a toolkit. Timely!
 You're one smooth talker! Almost got entranced myself. When you told him about that bush in the man's guts… Will you tell me more? I didn't catch everything through the wall.
 I know a lot of anecdotes, all right.
 Got it, Worm.
 There's no point in sending him kind regards anymore, Nightjar. He's dead.
 It hurts… but it's different now. What did you give me?
 That insane mixture of yours, made from various pills.
 Where does it hurt now?
 A shmowder? Are you nuts? Why did you waste it on me?
 Who else?
 In the stomach. It burns. But not the way it did before.\nI was sick with that new disease, I know. What did you give me?
 A shmowder.
 They can be… kinda lethal, by the way. If you're weak.
 But you're alive.
 I didn't have anything else to give you. And no time, either.
 Is this your idea of gratitude?
 No. Sorry. I mean… Thanks.
 That's better.
 You're welcome. Although, to be fair, I didn't do much.
 Think you have saved him? You cheat! Only got him a brief break from death.\nIt did not keep me at bay forever. And so I will return to him, again and again, and you shall not have such wild potions with you. Little remains.
 What do you want?
 I'm not in the habit of speaking to hallucinations.
 Ugh, this thing again… Maybe I caught the disease from the boy?
 I was looking for Rubin. He's upstairs, waiting for you.
 I was looking for the Judge.
 No one enters this house uninvited. Get lost. And do not return unless summoned.
 Will you ever summon me…?
 Don't get cheeky with me, girl. I'm not…
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I'll never leave this place, even if just to visit someone. Mother never traveled, either.\nDo you think that's awful? Sometimes I recall that the wider world is vastly different than our corner—and yet I know nothing of it.
 Well, it does limit you. I only came into my own after I left.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 COLD\nICY—COLD\nI—SEE—COLD\nALL CALLED\nALL
 …You really can talk?
 I don't know how to care for him…
 Yeah… he's not dead.
 See? I've got a second daughter now. The first one is over there, by the Gorkhon… and the second is here, by my side.\nUmm… Any idea what they eat?
 Grace has moved to Peter Stamatin's place. Who would have guessed…
 All right. I'll drop by your place some time later to talk about the Kin.
 And what the fuck do you want, Artemy the Uninvited?
 Just dropping by.
 Watch your tongue, old man. I did nothing to provoke this attack.
 Someone is willing to help me out with equipment.
 Glad to see you in good health.
 Likewise. I was wondering about Grace. Have you found her a new home?
 Are you with a child?
 I… what? No!
 I can hear a baby crying.
 Well… Fair enough. I'll still carry the baby, but I'll let the people in the Town Hall know you were the one who found it.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whoever rescues a baby from an infected district and brings it to the Town Hall will be rewarded.
 …You're a hero, you know that? How did you find it? Is it healthy?
 I'm not sure, I'm not a pediatrician. It seems quiet and content though.
 All right, I can see you desperately need redemption. Take the baby. Go on, save your soul.
 Wait. Give me a moment to think.
 ....
 So, got anything to say?
 To hell with it. Now is not the time to get misty-eyed with old friends.
 It's not like he created all that on his own.
 No two people in the world had more differences than your father and Simon. They couldn't agree on anything, but got very close. Even though they should've been rivals—maybe even enemies. Like Notkin and I.
 You don't look like enemies.
 I'm sorry about your loss, Caspar.
 Excuse me, but why in the world should you care? I don't understand why you find it appropriate to pry into our affairs.
 I do care.
 You're in an odd place at an odd time. I suspect you're up to no good.
 Sounds serious.
 "Negotiate." A big word.
 What are you doing in this pub?
 Since you came here anyway, at least stay here, all right? Indoors.
 I care about everything these days. Such is a doctor's job in the days of an outbreak.
 Fancy meeting you here.
 Am I disturbing you?
 The hypothesis. The theory. The idea. Was I not sufficiently clear? It needs testing.\nIf Notkin stops playing the fool and sends his Soul-and-a-Halves to search, maybe we can even do it tonight.
 Will you take me with you?
 Elaborate.
 Huh, so you came here too? That's lucky. Something does feel off. I think there's someone else here beside us.
 Who?
 Yes, a legion of microbes. If we don't get infected, consider us born once again tonight...
 Well, I guess someone lives here. Or used to.
 Perhaps it <i>is</i> Death himself. I never would have said this before, but… everything happens.
 Come now… Perhaps some drifter just got in.
 Stay here. I'll come back to you after I check.
 There's no one here but us.
 Your friend only talks to me through clenched teeth. Perhaps you trust me more?
 No, I'm content. As you can see, Khan has deigned to ask us for help. That's almost like admitting he's wrong. I'd never ask him for anything, however badly we needed it. Pride is more important.\nWe can live without him. He can't live without us. As they say, <i>Q.E.D.</i>
 Is he your friend?
 Perhaps I do.
 I did help you with that trial of yours, remember?
 You seemed to agree with the way I resolved that issue with… Lika, I believe was the name?
 By the way, I did find myself a Half. Can you imagine who it is?
 She should not. But neither is it wise to let her take the baby. Go ahead, basaghan, take it to the Town Hall.
 No one ever believes me… I could turn myself inside out, and still, no one ever would! \nI genuinely wanted to do good… Then she came along, and then you! Am I cursed, truly? Fate… It must be fate…
 Leave fate out of this.
 What have you done, yargachin… You've ruined a life. Did the baby survive this pest only to be destroyed by that hag? Baarhani, baarhani!
 Such were the lines. I believed her, not you. End of discussion.
 I'm still thinking.
 Slow down!
 How should I know?
 Believe it or not, it's a talking bull.
 A boy like you. Very energetic.
 A hamster.
 Come on, you don't need to convince me. We trust you anyway, don't we, Jester? Jester does. And so do I. You're honest with us, we open our souls to you. Honesty is the key here.
 All right. What have you here?
 My enemy.
 Mortal?
 Are you two at war?
 That would be too strong a word… but fights happen, yes. When it all began, we fought until the first blood was drawn. There was a lot of spite.
 But why?
 Because of that stupid Tower. It changes how they think. Turns dreams real, imagine that. They're addicted to it.\nWe, on the other hand, don't need it at all. We have our own world, no less perfect. We have our Halves and both feet planted firmly on the ground… We don't try to escape reality.\nKhan called us traitors. Deserters. They can go blow… their Tower.
 I see. So what united you two?
 What does he want from you?
 What do candles have to do with it?
 Who cares? You're asking like you honestly believed that bullshit. Light candles, scare Death away. Light nine, become immortal… Ha, right. Like the world works that way.
 Then why are you to planning to check this bullshit?
 Death? A bird? What?
 So Death is a stay-at-home kind of guy… Huh.
 Wait until dawn, I guess. It's not like we have tons of matches.
 Are you stupid? Our friends would never do that. Something strange really <i>is</i> happening…
 Like what?
 We need to find a way to open that door.
 Are you for real?
 The place will become less gloomy in the light.
 I'll scout the house. Since we're here anyway…
 Stay here. If anything happens, scream, and I'll come for help.
 Orderly
 So can I continue?
 Yeah, yeah.
 Patrolman
 
 Profiteer
 Evergreen
 Someone is selling a bull here. Only three hundred for a truly honestly talking pet! Deal of the year!\n\nThen again, it's a good healthy bull.
 Khan
 Will you drop by today?
 Sure. In an hour or so.
 If you promise to feed me.
 Well… If I have the time. Which is to say, I doubt it.
 
 
 It was prophesied that I'd "spill rivers of blood" soon. Well, there are all kinds of blood.
 
 
 It's been prophesied I'll "spill rivers of blood." Do even greater sacrifices await me?
 
 Sticky
 Ah, our new doctor… but this ain't a drugstore. I can't help you.
 This is a sanitary inspection.
 Everything is clean here. No rats. And there's been no orders to close the shop. Or else I demand a warrant from the Kains.
 I've just been to them.
 Stop it with the nonsense, good sir. If you're here to buy, here's the counter. And if you're only interested in rambling, the door is over there. We're closed.
 No. First, you will answer a question for me.
 Wonder Bull
 So here's the plan.\nGo into the shop and ask the merchant something… complicated. Just make sure he gets carried away in the conversation. The longer and louder you talk, the better. Keep him occupied. Distracted. Got it?
 What are you up to, kid? Robbing his storeroom?
 Yeah… A silvertongue, you aren't. I couldn't get to the toolbox. Only grabbed a few small items.
 I don't talk. I do.
 Done and done! Got it. There, in the bag.
 You little risk-taker…
 In any case, the loot is plenty. There, in the bag. I could barely drag it out. Take the heavy things, and I'll carry the rest.
 Let's see…
 So, is the toolkit any good? Can we repair the alambic now?
 Like we have a choice…
 
 
 
 
 With Father's apparatus over there. The big one, I mean. I can't brew anything while it's broken, but I don't have a toolkit either… Shudkher!
 Hey, I know where we can get a toolkit! I'll get it for you… I mean, for us. \nThere's this place in the Atrium… and this guy who owes me. But I'll need your help. All right? The box is heavy, I can't carry it on my own.
 My help with what? Carrying the box, or following up on old debts? Then again, who cares…
 Sure, nothing to it.
 
 
 Because of the outbreak, we have nowhere to bury the dead. Corpses are just dumped at the cemetery. Grace forbids burning them.
 
 
 The dead no longer smother Grace. She's unhappy about it. I'm fine having offended her, so long as she's alive.
 Grace is right. We must not burn them. Let it all stay as it was.
 Grace is right. We must not burn them. Let it all stay as it was. I hope Capella's visions are just dreams.
 The dead no longer smother Grace. They won't reach her even if they continue to pile up: she's been relocated from the cemetery.
 We must not burn the dead. But piling them up inside Grace's small heart isn't an option, either. She's been relocated from the cemetery.
 Grace is right. We must not burn them—and taking her away from the cemetery would be wrong, too.\n\nLet it all stay as it has been. I hope Capella's visions are only dreams.
 
 
 It's too crowded underground, the dead are shrieking and smothering each other. Even I can hear it, if I try.
 
 
 Capella wants to tell me something. I don't know how I know it, only that I do.
 
 
 
 
 
 What was <i>that?</i> A hallucination? Has it devoured the dead? How, exactly? What kind of trickery is this?
 It's too crowded underground, indeed… Nice meeting you once again, my dear hometown.\n\nIf I burn the grave, this will stop for sure. But should I…?
 I've burned the grave. Other gravediggers will become bolder now. There will be fewer misplaced dead.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Grace is "coming apart at the seams." If I don't hurry, something bad is about to happen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I guess I should pay a visit to Lara. At least <i>someone</i> in this town understands that doctors need to eat!
 
 
 Lara wants to turn her Shelter into a… well, <i>shelter</i> for the homeless. To do that, she needs a personal water barrel.\n\nI should look for one in the Middle Town: in the Spleen, the Maw, the Backbone, and so on.
 
 
 It's suspected that the Town's water barrels might be poisoned, even infected.
 
 
 I've found a barrel with suspiciously unclean water. But it's not like there's acid inside… The water just seems muddy. \n\nI need to think hard what to do about it.
 
 
 I have a sample of muddy water.\n\nIf I take it to the Bachelor, he'd certainly order all potentially dangerous barrels to be destroyed. A third of the Town will be left dehydrated—but safe.
 
 
 
 
 
 I've ordered that the suspicious barrel be delivered to the Shelter. Lara's "Home for the Living" will have water.\n\n…I have a bad feeling about it.
 So? Did you think it over? Any orders?
 You know what? Take this barrel to the outskirts, to Ravel's house. I'll examine it there.
 No. I'm still thinking. It takes time. Not that you would know.
 There's been a rumor that someone infected the barrels…
 I gave the suspicious sample to Dankovsky. It will be difficult for the townsfolk to stay hydrated with so many water barrels destroyed…
 I've ordered that the suspicious barrel be delivered to the Shelter. Lara's "Home for the Living" will have water.\n\n…What have I done?!
 
 Dora
 How did you find me?
 Followed my heart.
 Everything's covered in blood. Hey, why is that?
 The lamp by the door, you grand conspirator.
 So Bad Grief yapped, then? I'd throttle him with his own loose tongue, if I could.\nWhat are you doing here?
 What is that behind the curtains? Is it… shining?
 Wrong question. What are <i>you</i> doing here?
 Bad Grief didn't give you away. Well, he tried not to, at least.
 Who cares now. If you've found me, others will, too. And I'm short on time!
 Time for what?
 What are you afraid of? Who are you butchering here?
 I can't say anything right now. You don't want to know, anyway. Ignorance is bliss. Just trust me when I say it's important. Very important, Cub.
 Stakh. You're making medicine too, aren't you? Answer me!
 Come on, tell me. We must work together!
 Listen. I won't tell you anything until I'm done. Too many people would be let down. <i>The</i> person would…\nIf you want to know so badly, buy me some time to finish what I started!
 Buy from whom? Who are you hiding from?
 Your Kin are after me. Surrounding me like wolves. They haven't attacked yet, but soon will. Perhaps they're already here. Never far from you…
 What have you done to them? Stolen something?
 Stakh… You told me you have no idea what an "udurgh" is. What are you hiding behind those sheets?
 I know it's the Kin. But why?
 It's a long story. Will you stop asking?! Just lend me a hand! Scout the area around the warehouse. I suspect the steppe people wait for me…\nAnd if they have found me, well… Handle them.
 Handle them how?
 I don't know. However you can. Don't let them find me. They can sense where I am… I know their breed! They're getting close. I need more time! Just one more day! Or two… Maybe.
 Fine, to hell with you. Keep working.
 All right, I'll scout the area. Please hide better. Put the lamp out.
 I'll visit tomorrow night. I'll knock—our secret knock. I expect details.
 I know, I know. There's a swarm of vultures outside. Drawing closer, closer. That's all right. What matters is, I'm finished. I can rest now…
 Where is… whatever you worked with yesterday?
 You're finished with… what? Those people outside, what do they want?
 You're talking about death. Like hell, friend. Too early. You need sleep.
 It's depleted.
 You promised to tell me what you were doing.
 What was it, Stakh? Was it human? Was it… the Eighth on my list?
 I helped Dankovsky make a vaccine. My product is not what he wanted; it only provides temporary protection. But it's better than nothing.\nIt's not what <i>I</i> wanted, either… but I won't throw in the towel.
 What was it made of?
 What did you want to make?
 So you worked on a serum! Without me! Small wonder you failed. But why?
 I'll tell you later, if I survive to tell the tale.
 About your survival. Do you plan to just sit here and wait until they break in?
 What do these people want? They're from the Kin. Did you wrong them?
 All I want now is a good night's sleep… A few hours would do… I need to change hideouts. Nothing's keeping me here anymore.\nCan you distract them? Lead them away?
 Yes. I can do that.
 No. You've done something suspicious, something bad. I won't help you until I know more.
 I just need a few minutes to slip away. And then you run away, too, or give up. They want me, not you. They take you as one of their own. I don't want to hide behind you, but I can barely stay on my feet…
 Small wonder.
 That's fine. It's not the first time. All right, be ready to run.
 I'm not sure I'll manage. I'm on my last legs myself.
 What Eighth? What list? What are you talking about?
 Just tell me what you did.
 Tell me what you were working on, at least!
 I committed a crime in their spirit. A butcher crime. They were accused, so, many were murdered. I didn't come forward. I needed to finish the job.
 Sounds just like you.
 And now what? Do you plan to confess?
 Don't you dare confess. Or we'll have one less doctor.
 For now, I can't. Do as you will.
 All right, I'll help you out. Like I always do. Have it your way.
 I wouldn't beat a whole crowd, anyway.
 
 
 I can't run from my fears forever. Sooner or later I'll have to go home.
 Home sweet home is locked. The local authorities must have the key. I can't keep pretending this doesn't concern me.
 Sahba, also called Aspity, preserves the knowledge of my roots.
 Colleague, this is nonsense. You're stuck in the Middle Ages… I suppose I just have to accept this.\nWhenever an outbreak strikes, the rumor mill spins its wheels. Someone poisoned the wells! Who? Gypsies, heathens, witches, foreigners… I won't act without proof. Which doesn't exist.
 What's this, then?
 Good. Without water, we're done for.
 No ifs. Consider it infected. Then… Well, it's not like I have a choice! We'll follow the plan and destroy all the water barrels in the Middle Town. Effective immediately. We simply can't take any risks here.\nI can't shake this sense of dread… As if fate itself acts against us.
 Damn it… Lara!
 Great. So I robbed half the Town of water with my own hands.
 Well, I used to have a scalpel... but it came and went.
 Then have this one. We've kept one just in case...
 In case you need to cut an innocent person?
 I don't know… No. I'm not.
 That's not how I imagined our meeting to go, basaghan…
 What are you waiting for? Take what you need and go. You can sleep upstairs if you're tired.
 Aren't you happy to see me, Lara?
 It's hard to tell under all the covers, but it's a living baby. It should be brought to the Town Hall.
 Baby
 It feels strange to carry a baby like an item, but now isn't the time to be sentimental.
 
 Baby
 Another baby… How many are there? I should carry it to the Town Hall.
 A parcel of life.
 
 It wasn't me who found him, it was that circus performer. I'm just making the delivery.
 We ain't need a fifth.
 Yeah, four is enough. Got you!
 Well, you keep your watch.
 I've got an entire litter.
 Apologies. I thought you brought in a baby.
 You thought <i>I</i> brought in a baby?
 You thought I <i>brought in</i> a baby?
 You thought I brought in <i>a baby?</i>
 Do you visit infected houses during your work?
 If I have to.
 Normal, abandoned, infected… You name it.
 The Mistress decreed: Everyone who rescues an infant from an infected house is to bring it here. Such a dangerous feat won't go unrewarded.
 As if a baby stands a chance against sand pest.
 .....
 Good bull, who's a good bull… Uherney ereed bayna gyy?
 Khara bosooly! Got any surprises in store for me? How long do I need to wait? Shake your head, at least.
 I guess today will be all right, then.
 Booha, oh booha… Yamar berkhe! You're a surly one, aren't you?
 There is a chance! They discussed it earlier today: Adults are more susceptible to the disease! Babies can hold out the longest. Kids, too. Even teenagers, and those imps poke around everywhere. Most emerge none the worse for it! 
 Well I'll be damned…
 The other teenagers end up dead.
 You should inform Dankovsky about this. If babies really possess the greatest resistance… he should be able to use that, somehow.
 Who cares about rewards…
 Got it. If I ever find one, I'll bring it here.
 Anna Angel? Going outside, today of all days? That seems unlikely. She has a fit every time people mention dirt around her. It must've been someone else.
 I know. I got suspicious, so I intervened and brought the baby straight to you.
 Maybe she desperately needs money. That, or she's desperately trying to get into everyone's good graces.
 It was her. She's braver than she looks.
 You can't know that.
 Well… Sometimes you have to take a leap of faith. It's better than just not doing anything at all.
 Perhaps it is fate. Our paths must have crossed for a reason… for the benefit of that kid.
 It was a girl…
 How do you know?
 What do you mean, "was"? Are you still trying to accuse that woman? That's slander!
 She needed that baby more. If you truly want to do good, find another opportunity. They're plentiful.
 Turns out, you <i>are</i> of help. I think we'll get along just fine.
 This hunt for blood sounds dangerous, Cub. Won't you just infect yourself? Promise me you'll be as careful as you can. If you need me, please ask.
 I'm not making any promises.
 I promise.
 Thank you, Lara. You're the only one who believes in me.
 So we've met. Can't say any of us are eager to meet again soon. Lara is alive and well, and that's good enough.
 That Stakh Rubin, akhar. Your father's false student. You know him. Tell me what he does at night.
 I can tell you what ho doesn't do: sleep. As far as I can tell.
 I barely know him.
 "False"? He was a very loyal student. Went overboard, even.
 Tell me, what does he do during the night? Where does he hide?
 Why do you care?
 Ask him yourself. During the day, he's in the hospital, working.
 Good question…
 He has no respect for the dead. No respect for the body. He cuts bodies open without grace. He knows not the Lines.\nHe's an outsider.
 Precisely. Outsiders have no obligation to honor our traditions.
 For what it's worth, I'm an outsider too.
 The Khatanghe are worried. Your friend is doing evil. The blame, as always, will be pinned to us. And we are dwindling by the hour as it is. Mere hundreds left now.
 Unente… Don't tell me. I know.
 I think… Actually, disregard that. I don't think anything.
 I'll take care of him. He's my friend, after all. Not yours.
 He won't say. And we don't have time. He needs to be stopped. Fast. Very fast.
 Why?
 You're right. Otherwise he might die from exhaustion.
 I'm curious now. What <i>does</i> he do at night…?
 We managed to hold until dawn. Whatever it was, it's gone now. Now I need to grab the boys and leave this place.
 Don't worry, I'm used to these kinds of jobs. I won't get caught.
 Whoa… Hold your horses. So I'm providing shelter for a little crook?
 What do you mean, "used to"?
 I can crawl through any vent. I've been an orphan since I was very little. What else am I supposed to do?
 Work?
 Hey, come on! I'm no thief! I only do it for fun. Well, unless I get real hungry… Hunger does that to people.\nI also leave small trinkets behind, sometimes. Like mementos.
 Why did you lie to me? You said a guy here owed you!
 Cleaning Fat Belly's cauldrons at the cannery? Sure, I'll get right on it.\nWork… Freedom is better. Who wants to cut up a bunch of bodies all day and night, anyway? Nah. I prefer <i>jobs</i> over work.
 "Jobs." You mean crimes.
 I do. I cut up bodies.
 You've crawled through vents since you were very little, too?
 Well, he does! Do you have <i>any</i> idea how stingy that man is? He never pays more than half price for whatever you get him.\nWho do you think he got the toolkit from in the first place? Strain and Patches brought it to him. They carried the thing all the way from the Tanners, and he only paid half a hundred!
 So he's a fence, then…
 Patches, huh…
 Stop being so stubborn, will you? I'd never offer you anything unfair. Illegal, maybe, but it won't stain your conscience.\nAnd, in any case… the cure is more important, isn't it?
 Make up your mind about how you're trying to convince me.
 And where did <i>they</i> get it from? Just found it in the steppe?
 Nah. In the street.
 Your lack of shame is honestly impressive.
 What an incredible feat.
 "For fun." For fun!
 The law matters, kid. Come on, let's go home.
 Come on! It's easy! Just talk to him for as long as you can and make sure he doesn't break conversation. The longer you keep him, the more I'll be able to… repossess.
 No chance, kid. We should buy that toolkit fair and square. That'll be a lesson for you.
 All right. Let's do it. Just don't get caught.
 By the way… a bunch of Soul-and-a-Halves just walked by. New scouts. They have something for you. Said they want to help out "the son"—that's you, the Old Man's son.
 Scouts? What do they scout, I wonder?
 The infection. It moves around the Town, changes districts. They map it.
 Little morons… Are they out of their minds?
 No, we'll return to the shop and sell it back! Ugh, why did I even agree to this…
 Not a thinker, either.
 So I take it someone here hasn't been spanked in a while?
 It depends…
 Let's skip out of here. Fast.
 You'll carry everything. Let that burden be your lesson about conscience.
 It wasn't true, though. Just a medical joke.
 I never said anything like that. You misheard.
 So we now have three dozen little plague carriers on our hands. Lovely.
 That's one huge bag…
 I already know… They were looking for trouble and found it. Come on, we have to get back to work.
 As if we didn't have enough trouble already. All right, I'm going.
 I have no intention of buying anything. Just wanted to meet you.
 But <i>I</i> can help <i>you.</i> You've got a rash all over your face, red eyes… Those are the signs.
 Why? I don't give out goods on trust anymore, not in times like these. I know who you are: a doctor. You know who I am: a merchant. There's no reason for us to pretend we're friends.
 Well, having a doctor as a friend might come in handy these days. Doctors and merchants are anyone's most useful contacts.
 Is that some kind of joke?
 Now is not a time for jokes. Do you think I would just drop by at random?
 So what, will I be quarantined now? Is this… <i>the thing?</i>\n…Come on, talk, you bastard! Is it?
 I'm afraid so.
 Then this is it. I'm done. Go, doctor. I need to think of my soul now.
 Calm down. It was just a joke.
 Oh, so this is your idea of of a joke? I love jokes. I'm a funny guy too. I think I'll charge you extra from now on. As a kind of humor tax, you know? So think twice before you make another joke—or it will all <i>cost</i> you twice.\nNow buy what you came to buy or get lost.
 Come on... that was uncalled for.
 I suspect it might be. We'll need to check.
 What's there to check? It's lethal. Everyone knows it. But… did you mean it?
 Slow down. No need to jump to conclusions. In our line of work, miracles happen.
 You got me. I was just kidding… Ha ha. The look on your face!
 Calm down. If it were the sand pest, you'd be convulsing on the floor already. It's different.
 I did.
 What do you mean?
 You know, I remember this story… One time, a person inhaled a pine tree cone. Can you guess what happened?
 Well? What is it?
 So here's a coin. Heads or tails? Choose.
 Perhaps there is a reason. There's an outbreak in town, haven't you heard?
 There an outbreak in the Town. For now, it's only touched the poorer districts, but who knows…
 An outbreak? So what? Am I selling rotten meat? No. Find yourself a food store to harass!
 So you might be a dead man walking already, pal.
 Come now… No one is accusing you.
 What's that behind your back?
 Is this your idea of fun, sawbones? I won't be the butt of your jokes. I might not have studied in a big city, but I have my dignity. Good day.
 Well… This didn't work out.
 Hey, let's trade, at least.
 And to you! See you around.
 Why so rude? Expecting someone? Eager to turn away a potential witness, maybe? I've heard you're not just a seller, but a buyer, too…
 I'll take a look at your wares.
 Damn it... I hope the kid was quick.
 Sounds about right. You're not the most honest person in town, are you?
 Well?
 A month passes.
 Forget it. Let's get down to business. Do you buy… ahem… derelict goods?
 What's at stake?
 Everything.
 Just choose.
 I need to know what the stakes are.
 I can't choose for you. That would be dishonest.
 Your life.
 Choose.
 But I haven't bet anything.
 You have.
 The stake is your life. Always has been. You just never noticed.
 Well?
 Well… Tails, I guess.
 I'm afraid you lose.
 Where do you get your goods?
 We doctors have a very particular brand of humor. It's different.
 Yeah, it is… Relax.
 Lucky you. You don't even know how lucky…
 Keep this coin. Dark times are coming. It'll come in handy.
 No. No, he wasn't well. It killed him. What did you expect?
 And?
 And they find a tumor in his chest. Cancer. Growths all over.
 Come on, speak up!
 So I dissect him. And you know what I find in his chest?
 No need to rush. This is just a preamble…
 If I knew, I'd make you pay for every minute of my patience. Which has, by the way, run out.
 A pine tree branch! Lungs are rich with oxygen, so it sprouted. So yeah, things happen…
 Then I won't tell you how it ends. Stay ignorant.
 I'm not so rich as to pay for someone's patience. See you, good man.
 The small contraption in the Lair can be used to produce herbal tinctures.
 
 
 
 
 Rifle
 Precise. Long-range. Deadly.
 I've held such a rifle in my hands only once before. I'd prefer to not think about that day.
 Thanks for coming by.
 I'm just here to check in on Patches.
 Thanks for having me.
 Ah. He's dead.
 Dead? When did it happen?
 I'm sorry, kids.
 Same day you examined him. In the evening. Never mind… \nNotkin even asked Clara for help, in the end. But, like, she couldn't do anything either. Even she is helpless against the sand pest.
 We're all in a great deal of trouble.
 I'll find a cure, boy. I promise.
 I fear Notkin could have caught the infection… But we hope it's just canine distemper.
 Shudkher! No, no...
 No, kid. Humans don't get dog diseases. Not even the Soul-and-a-Halves.
 Why did you come, anyway?
 Is this an interrogation? Just wanted to see how you're doing.
 To check up on Patches. How's he doing? Getting better?
 Here. This is for you. Made by our scouts.
 What is it?
 A map of the infection. Our scouts sneak everywhere… Will it be useful?
 It will.
 You shouldn't have risked it. I won't take it. And never do it again.
 You sneak into infected districts?
 Very carefully. It's a public service! We want to help you doctors!
 You little blockheads! This district would have been clear, if not for you! I won't take it!
 What do you mean, "carefully"?
 It means what it means. Why do you think I'm sitting outside and not going in there?
 You morons… <i>Morons!</i>
 Hand it over. And never do that again!
 
 Funeral Attendant
 Volunteer
 Manager
 Onlooker
 Yeah… I gathered as much.
 Nerve
 Blood
 Skin
 Oh for the love of… How could you know <i>that?</i> Your talents include seeing the future <i>and</i> what's in my pockets?
 
 Khatangher
 The booha grants you his blood. Take the blood.\nThe booha are immune to Earth plague. The disease rolls off them. Water off fowl. The blood is strong. Drink it, yargachin. It's good for your health.
 They don't ever get sick? You're sure?
 Bayarlaa, people. I'll take as much as I need myself.
 We keep eyes on every bull. We love them. Know them better than our children. If a bull died, how could we have missed it?\nA learned man came to us. He said, "The bulls brought the disease." He was a fool. He made a mistake.
 No, he's no fool… Perhaps I should tell him of this bull thing.
 So there's something special about their blood. Sure, why not.
 That's fine, pal. I'll take the bull's gift. Bayarlaa.
 You found us, yargachin. We are happy to have you here. We looked for a butcher, a butcher to help us restore order. To complete the rank.
 What are you celebrating, children of mine?
 What order? What rank?
 Is the girl comfortable up there? Are you sure she won't catch a cold?
 Behold this perfect body. It must be properly divided.
 You're talking about the bull, I hope.
 A perfect body… A chimera. I get it. The girl fused with the bull, and must be separated. Right?
 So, a rite. I thought such traditions were long forgotten. Did you revive it because of the plague?
 You're a funny man, yargachin. I'm glad to hear your jokes. We also joke, sometimes. Among the Kin. Yes. Jokes…
 Is this your attempt to end the plague?
 The outbreak is only one misfortune. We do this for other reasons. \nThe bull is like the world. A yargachin cuts the bull along the Lines, and the world comes to order. The bull is pleased. We are pleased. You are pleased.
 Fine. I know the Lines. I'll cut the bull.
 No. I won't be pleased at all. Find another butcher.
 We can grant blood. All you want. The booha's blood, free of Earth disease. Never sick.
 Really? That changes things.
 When I need blood, I'll take a sample from any bull. No killing required.
 Look. He says farewell to the Town. The Town says farewell. While he walks the streets, the Town grows into him, binds him with love. When it is done, he will return to the place of blood, the Ragi Barrow.\nWe will wait for the butcher there.
 You do that. I'll come soon.
 I'll think about it.
 Getting the taste of it, huh, ripper?
 Huh?
 Who are you? An orderly? What were you doing in there?
 You should be wondering who I saw.
 What is that white cross on the door? Did you mark our house?
 I did.
 Any luck?
 I've found one. It's near the Stillwater.
 How fares you kine, Khatangher?
 How fares your kine, abgay.
 
 He is ready, yargachin, he only waits for you, yargachin. Much joy in such waiting. Soon he will become himself, and the sky and earth will return to their due places. Gorkhon shall flow, and harsh winter will chase away the foul autumn. That which came from the ground shall return to the ground.\nA blade for you, yargachin. To trace his Lines properly.
 That's a good blade.
 Desperate One
 I've done nothing yet. But I'm about to.
 I take your business, whatever it is, seriously.
 Kira
 Bobber
 Basya
 Barb
 "Wench"
 Vole
 May
 Don't worry about it. Just a union. Of people under fifteen. Anyway, ask her. She might be mad at me if I say too much.
 Okay.
 Good. Tight lips are a good skill to have.
 Is she at her place, in the Lump?
 Damned if I know. Either there or at the Station. Just… don't stomp around if you ever go there. It's a discreet place, not for the grown-ups.
 The Station is a discreet place? Trains have become rare indeed…
 I won't stomp around. I'll just take a peek.
 Busybody
 
 
 I'm exhausted. Maybe a bottle of twyrine would reinvigorate my thoughts?
 That's what they call a bull marked for slaughter. Butchering a body imitates an act of creation. \nActually, I've heard that such a ritual will take place on this very day. They've brought in a bull from the steppe, now they parade it on the streets. It's the principle of correspondence in action.
 Huh… Interesting.
 That's what they call a bull marked for slaughter. Butchering a body imitates an act of creation. \nActually, I've heard that such a ritual will take place tomorrow. They'll bring in a bull from the steppe and parade it on the streets. It's the principle of correspondence in action.
 Huh… Interesting.
 Correspondence?
 Correspondence?
 Yes, I know.
 Sayn bayna, ekhene.
 Things are looking up. A beautiful bull is coming from the Steppe to walk the streets soon. Here, in the Earth, to chase away the pest. To restore things to how they were.
 Do you think it will help?
 Why bring one from the Steppe? Don't we have enough of our own?
 That bull is clean, closer to Mother Boddho, to the Earth herself. All of ours are too close to the Olonngo. They expect death-Suok to grab them by the horns any day.
 Do you believe in the old rites?
 Not sure. The elders believe, and the young ones don't. \nTrying won't hurt, I think. There are ten reasons behind every change, but only one of them matters. How does one find it?
 You're right about trying.
 May only good changes come visit you, abgay.
 I know.
 He said farewell to the Town. The Town touched him and bound him with the string of love. The time for farewells is over. It is time to leave for the Ragi Barrow, the place of blood.\nGood thing you've come, yargachin. You know the Lines, you can complete the rite.
 Let's go.
 I'll think about it.
 No need. I'd rather use my own.
 No you won't, yargachin. We are numerous, and all of us need to partake of his blood.\nEvery bucket will nourish many Kindred souls. We are grateful for your craft, and so your share is bigger than any of ours already.
 When was the last time a bull died on its own?
 Funny, I had something similar happen. Lost the whole bull…
 Damn this town… I feel I'm trapped in a nightmare. The absurdity of it all… There's no one to talk to. Everyone's so volatile.\nThey all seem to want to help, but… their help is worse than hostility.
 I can genuinely help you, erdem. Examine this. It's bull blood.
 Leave it with me, I'll study it. Will only take a few hours. In that time, I suggest you hit the cot somewhere. I've seen corpses prettier than you.
 I can't. I have a lot on my plate. I'll just drop by later.
 All right. Thanks, erdem.
 Now that's a good question! Everyone else mourns while they celebrate. I think you know why. The beasts overflow with joy… Made a half-naked girl ride the thing… Shameless!
 Huh. Now <i>that</i> is a sight to behold.
 What is there to celebrate?
 Yeah, I remember hearing about the bull. So it's in the Hindquarters?
 This activity needs to be immediately curtailed. Do you know which house they were planning to visit?
 What do you mean? Lots of them.
 I have a favor to ask of you, Burakh. Find at least one house where the living harbor the dead. Find it and mark the door with… say, a white cross, as they did with the plague in the old days.\nIt will become my proof. Then I'll have leverage to deal with this matter.
 Leverage? Do you really need it? No one would question a Kain's actions.
 Doesn't a white cross mean a house is condemned?
 My informant told me that this has been going for a whole day, maybe longer.
 Exactly. We're the Kains. People only let us break the laws of nature because we obey the laws of justice. Do you understand?
 I do.
 It makes sense to show bull blood to Dankosky. He's the man with a microscope.
 While Dankovsky is working, I could take a nap or do other things. I'll check on his progress in a couple of hours.
 I think Dankovsky must be done with the bull blood.
 What did you call me?
 What would you have me call you? A haruspex?
 Huh?
 Well, you brought me more human organs, didn't you? Or did you just drop by for a chat?
 Do you know that your neighbor has a side job?
 He's just helping people, like me. It's called "compassion." As for his methods, they're none of my business. I stay out of his, he stays out of mine, that's how we stay good neighbors.\nI suggest you do the same.
 One day they'll bust you both.
 Actually, I know a brilliant joke about it. A dentist, a surgeon, and a veterinarian walk into a dissecting room...
 Stale.
 All right, how about a newer one? So there is this chemist who embalms the dead...
 Well... God be with you, kind people.
 Mind your own safety.
 I've nothing to hide.
 If I'm busted, I'll know whom to thank for it.
 I can tell it's not the plague. Your skin is normal.
 Flu… I doubt I can help you out with that.
 What does it mean?
 It means, "woe is this house."
 And don't you dare erase it… or mark other houses.
 Do you live here?
 Yes.
 Did you commission someone to… preserve your dead?
 We were scared they'd lock us all in if they found out…
 Well, now they will. But they wouldn't have if you'd just buried your dead properly.
 Don't worry, no one will harm you. Just bury your dead.
 The Kains' people will come here soon. Stay elsewhere until they're done.
 You have unburied people there.
 Leave us be, I beg of you… Don't tell anyone. We'll… we'll bury them all later. Tonight. At the cemetery. Just don't tell on us…
 Promise?
 I can't. It needs to be stopped, or else the whole district might get infected.
 I promise. I promise! Just don't tell them… They'll lock us all in… They'll sandbox us. Certain death. I'd give you money, but we have nothing left!
 Save your money. Just do as you promised.
 Calm down. No one will lock you in. And don't you dare erase the cross I'm about to draw.
 I marked the door with a cross. Send your people, just don't be too hard on the locals.
 Why would we harm them? Their only crime was being scared. What kind of monster punishes fear in times like these? Everyone is afraid, including you and me.
 You're right, I am afraid.
 It's the thinkers and dreamers who can afford fear. I am a doer.
 Odd sounds are coming from this house.
 The dead are hidden here.\n\nThe tenants are begging me not to mark the place. Are their fears without merit? The choice is mine.
 This house is so silent you can almost hear it.
 This house has already been marked with a cross… Not by me.
 The Town is calling to me...
 
 
 That's it. I don't have it in me to play guessing games anymore. Should I take a nap, maybe? There's always the hope I never wake up.
 Seems like the local urchins need assistance.
 Khatanger
 Don't go there now. Today, he's not listening. Go tomorrow, after you wake.\nFind the Ear, whisper in it, and it'll grant you a wish. And please let him know I hate it here and can't wait to leave! I've had enough of this place, tiimel daa…
 I'll be sure to let him know.
 Go there as soon as you wake. Find the Ear, whisper in it, and it'll grant you a wish. And please let him know I hate it here and can't wait to leave! I've had enough of this place, tiimel daa…
 I'll be sure to let him know.
 And do come back here sometime.
 I will. You take care of yourself.
 Go into the steppe in a few hours. Follow the railroad tracks… The long ones that unfurl to the outside world. A real line, not your metaphors.\nYou'll find me waitin'.
 I'll figure it out.
 I understand all kinds of lines. I'll find you.
 Those aren't metaphors.
 I know, I know. There's a swarm of vultures outside. Drawing closer, closer. That's all right. What matters is, I'm finished. I can rest now…
 Where is… whatever you worked with yesterday?
 You're talking about death. Like hell, friend. Too early. You need sleep.
 It's depleted.
 You promised to tell me what you were doing.
 What was it, Stakh? Was it human? Was it… the Eighth on my list?
 I helped Dankovsky make a vaccine. My product is not what he wanted; it only provides temporary protection. But it's better than nothing.\nIt's not what <i>I</i> wanted, either… but I won't throw in the towel.
 What was it made of?
 What did you want to make?
 So you worked on a serum! Without me! Small wonder you failed. But why?
 I'll tell you later, if I survive to tell the tale.
 Please be so kind as to survive.
 All I want now is a good night's sleep… A few hours would do…
 What Eighth? What list? What are you talking about?
 Just tell me what you did.
 Tell me what you were working on, at least!
 Nope. They're finished. Where there was a swarm, now there is no one.
 Did you… fix their vital signs, sawbones?
 Well… Sort of.
 I just asked very nicely, and they went home.
 How about hitting the cot right here? I can work your shift in the hospital tomorrow.
 A few days, you wanted to say.
 Noted.
 Why are the Kin after you? Tell me.
 Not here. It's a long story, and this place is… well, unsuitable. If you really want to talk about it, come by my place tonight. Or tomorrow.
 Got it. So what do we have here? What work needs to be done?
 I've seen him already. And I've done all I could.
 I know why you feel this way, Murky…
 Why?
 Because if you're infected, but you don't die, that means… means… never mind. It means nothing.
 There's a rumor circulating around that the carrier of the pest is an orphan girl. Show me your tongue.
 I'm not sick! Nope, not me. Never am. I don't even get colds, not even when I'm soaked and barefoot.
 …True. No signs of the disease.
 Yeah… It's all nonsense, of course. You can't be a carrier. I don't even need a blood sample…
 Because I'm a doctor and I said so. Look at the light and let me examine your pupils.
 You do that.
 So we will! We aren't suckers, and we <i>definitely</i> aren't cowards. Promise you that.
 And who is "we"?
 Scouts.
 I'd love to remember my childhood for a while and play with you kids. But I've got a different war on my hands.
 What will be done?
 The thing we're making will help you a bunch. Come to Notkin's Castle and see for yourself. But for now, it's a secret. A surprise!
 I don't like surprises.
 Why can't you urchins just stay home?
 Best way to help me would be staying safe, so you don't end up on my table. Got it?
 Hey, uncle! Can you fix the turner for us, please? It's close, over in the Nutshell. Please, please, please! Pretty please!
 The turner? What?
 Yes, of course. Let me drop everything and run to fix your "turner."
 Well, since you know the magic word… I suppose it is my duty.
 Yeah. A turner. You know… That thing that turns on itself. Like, like…
 …Luck.
 …A windmill.
 …A planet?
 Fix it, will you?
 Someday, maybe.
 Story of my life in a… uh, in <i>the</i> Nutshell.
 I never believed these ancient fairy-tales. None of us do any longer.
 Yamar berkhe basaghan bai...
 Would you like me to lend you my jacket? It's all covered in blood, but that's nothing new to you...
 "Yargachin" means "a butcher." What makes you think I am one?
 Be khara, you are a doctor who can dissect bodies. Has the right to. Knows which lines to trace with his knife. It's the same as a butcher.
 Weird. Do I have "doctor" written all over me?
 I can barely remember our tongue. How was it... Be oylgono ugyb, basaghan. Explain, please.
 My mother died giving birth to me. I don't remember her, but I need no other.
 Warm One
 …Are you an idiot? Or just hammered? Why would you spout such ridiculous lies? Wannabe Herostratus…
 Who?
 Nara
 …What do you have here, in the corner? Do my eyes deceive me? Is there really a well inside this house?
 Your eyes do not deceive you. It is, indeed, a well.
 Did you dig it?
 Insanity.
 But why…?
 Yes, yes, I know. Sacrilege. Taboo. \nHave you ever wondered what's behind that superstition?
 No. I've just been brought up this way.
 Did you make it out of… idle curiosity?
 Things change. You couldn't have missed the Tower on the other side.\nA couple of years ago, Father also introduced water infrastructure—actual pipes, Burakh. Didn't you notice the pumps? The pipes don't even run deep, but the outrage was a sight to behold.
 Small wonder.
 I'm surprised there wasn't a riot. Then again, considering your father's temper…
 Exactly. If they only tried…\nYou might find it surprising, but I lean toward the side of the common folk in this matter. Didn't we talk about that?
 Explain.
 I wanted to see what's behind all this superstition. I'm generally very fond of the Kin's folklore.\nYou see… I believe that by figuring out the inner motives of these people, we could create a truly solid economy. Help them accept the future, so to speak…
 So what did you find?
 I don't know yet. It hasn't gone smoothly. The deeper we dig, the less willing people are to descend. Still, no monsters have emerged, not yet.
 So… You called for me to show me… this?
 There probably <i>is</i> something behind the superstition. And I suggest you leave it buried.
 When I require your advice on this matter, dear Artemy, I'll be sure to let you know. But today is not that day.\nThis is my business. My responsibility.
 So what do you need of me today, then?
 Thanks.
 Ugh, back to square one. You think I'm some kind of avatar for the plague? What's wrong with you?! Are you still a child?
 I don't know. I'm not sure. Everything's possible.
 No, I'm doing what an adult must, trying to get to the bottom of all this.
 You're a shapeshifter, after all. I just feel it. Someone wears you like a glove.
 You're a good judge of character…
 All right. Let's try this. Your Murky is still on her way. I can sense her. She might get stranded, after all—these things happen.\nLet's test you, then. What do you know of the sand pest? Tell me!
 It's connected to Earth somehow.
 People say it didn't start on its own, that there's some scheme behind it.
 I do know not everyone dies from it. Some folks are beyond its reach.
 You're right, I still don't know enough. I don't understand the world I live in.
 If you agree to this, your Murky might live longer. And her friend will, from now on, address you directly—no middlemen, no interference.\nWhat say you, oh brave ripper?
 Deal. But leave Murky alone. And never touch her again!
 I'd say you're a horrible person. And useless. Forget it.
 What a disappointment. Even Murky had more curiosity. What is there to talk about? You can't save anyone. Not even yourself.
 Surely she's home now. Or maybe in that lonely train car…
 Oh, shut it. You're lying, as always.
 I can do many things. Haven't I told you already? I have. Twice, I think. So don't complain now.
 Where's Murky?
 Watch my hands. The right knows not what the left does. The left knows not what the right does. The forepaw doesn't follow the hindpaw; the midfoot, the forefoot; the lower hand, the secret one; the upper hand—the elegant one. \nWhat are you looking at?
 …You're a fast sprinter.
 You don't believe me… You don't want to. Fine. Be my guest. Check.\nYou want an easy answer, don't you? You want a monster you can drive a stake into, or bargain with… That'd be so heroic, wouldn't it? And so much simpler than the hard work of discovering a cure.
 Yeah, right. What could be simpler than slaying a monster?
 Work, Burakh! Forget this child's play! Steppe miracles, childhood mysteries… Leave them to me. Step aside, and deal in earthly matters.\nGo! Work! Deal with your damn town! You're the one who must figure out what it's made of.
 But who was Murky talking to?
 Hanging the cure over my head? You think I've made no progress?
 That's unfair of you.
 Fair enough… Thanks for setting me straight.
 Murky talks to rocks and herbs. Murky was raised by steppe wolves. She's a wolf cub herself. Why would you ever take her words seriously?
 Yeah… You're right. Go. I'll take Murky home.
 Kids deserve trust, or bad things happen. I know from experience.
 What kind of trick is this?
 Uh… Did you see Murky?
 
 
 I know a good obstetrician, all right… He'll cut whatever needs to be cut, including railroads.
 
 
 Grief will wait for me at the railroad after midnight. We'll cut the unnecessary Line together.
 I didn't go with Grief. I wonder if he blew anything up without me? I doubt it.
 
 We're not blowing anything up. Grief says he never planned to. All we have is hope.
 I didn't meet up with Grief. I wonder if he blew anything up without me? I doubt it.
 
 
 Rubin spends nights at home now.
 I need to put five more organs into the ice box.
 I need to put four more organs into the ice box.
 I need to put three more organs into the ice box.
 I need to put two more organs into the ice box.
 I need to put one more organ into the ice box.
 Saburov already found Father's murderer once. I barely escaped that investigation. I don't care whom he slanders today.
 Rubin spends nights at home now.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rubin is tired. Dead tired. I can't help him with that. He'll either make it on his own... or not.
 Death can be stopped. A cure for sand plague exists. But how do I produce more than a few vials?
 Panacea
 The cure for sand pest. No side effects.
 Cures the sand pest with no side effects.
 Walked away from here on her own two feet. \nHer friend came for her. When she learned who her friend was, I think she decided to flee while you were distracted. To protect you, maybe.
 What friend?
 Go, Burakh. Murky is beyond your help now. You still don't get it.\nYou think with your fists. You don't understand life, or anything about this disease. How could you protect anyone, ignorant as you are?
 Who are you? You're not Clara. It's like you've been… changed.
 No tricks. I've stood here a while, listening in. You're all so funny, so fussy and serious.
 Spin that yarn elsewhere, little trickster. I could snap your neck.
 Quit buzzing around like a gnat and get to work!
 Where's Murky?
 Are you making fun of me? You just told me yourself…
 No, you can't. \nFirst, you swore an oath to never harm little tricksters. Second, I wouldn't let you. Third, I have plenty of necks to spare. Understand?
 I got it.
 No…
 I'm the real one. She is the impostor.
 Give Murky back! You hear me? You…
 I know more than you think.
 Ha. All right, so you're not entirely hopeless. Would you like to understand? You wanted to see Murky's friend—that, I can arrange.
 A life for a life, then?
 What's that supposed to mean?
 More traps? No, I'm not in the mood for games. Find another fool.
 …Are you angry with me?
 Very much so.
 No, kiddo. Of course I'm not.
 Are you feeling all right?
 Why did you leave without me?
 What is that supposed to mean? Why are you here?
 Will you forgive me?
 I'm not sure.
 I'm sorry.
 Don't "I'm sorry" me. What happened back there by the fire?
 It's not enough to be sorry.
 I was scared.
 All the more reason to stay close to me, not run off into the night.
 So? Have you met your friend?
 No. I got scared. I don't want to meet her anymore.
 Thank heavens…
 But you weren't scared to run around in the night alone?
 Like I have a choice…
 I'll just stay here for a while. And then I'll come home. To our home.
 All right, kiddo. Stay here if you need to. I'm… I'm happy you're alive and well.
 I expect to see you home in an hour.
 What is this place, Murky? Have you been living here long?
 Long? Always. This is… well, it's a boxcar. Broken, I guess. Useless.\nI used to dream that it'd attach to a train while I slept, and I'd wake up and see the sea.
 That's one bold dream. It'd take more than a night to get to the sea from here. More than a week, even.
 Aren't you scared here alone?
 I'm not alone at all.
 Oh… Please, no more weird friends. All right?
 Who is here with you, then?
 Guests visit, sometimes. They're not my friends—no one is—but they play next to the boxcar, and I watch through a crack, or from the roof.\nI also have Mother's doll.
 A doll… Well, that's something.
 Let's go home, kiddo. Get a bite to eat, or something.
 You won't ever be alone anymore.
 Come now… It's me who is sorry.
 Precisely. No separate rooms. No running water. No heat. No beds. \nAnd yes, it is spacious—vertically! I suppose Victor expects me to build eight-story bunk beds there? And add hanging ropes so that people from the upper layers can descend to the toilet?
 You should suggest that to the Kains, erdem. They'll appreciate your imagination. Building one's spirit, training their will, asking the perennial questions…
 They say you can tell who's infected immediately. That it shows.
 We don't know anything for certain yet… anything! The vaccine is a disaster… People are dropping like flies… Not a single patient recovered. Not a single one!
 I'm sorry.
 Questions, questions, questions… Always questions, never answers.
 I have a question for you too, erdem.
 An oak isn't felled in one stroke.
 
 
 
 
 By the way, what does "erdem" mean? Obviously it's a steppe word, but what's the translation? "Arrogant fool," maybe?
 No. It's a polite way to address a person of knowledge.
 All right. I'll leave you to it. Although, I think we're better off without an isolation ward at all.
 I need to administer painkillers to three more patients.
 Hot blood from the udurgh's Ear. A single drink replenishes you and restores health. But that's not why I need it.
 The only way to find out if this serum can cure the plague is to try it out.
 
 
 The strange blood from the Ear is invigorating, but if I drink it all, I won't have a sample anymore.
 I've used up all the underground blood. Nothing left to experiment with.
 
 
 I get anxious thinking about my kids… Are they faring all right in the Lair without me?
 Today, a bull will walk the Town's streets to touch it for the last time. Then it will be slaughtered.
 Aigul
 I need to administer painkillers to two more patients.
 I need to administer painkillers to one more patient.
 Changeling
 
 Audience
 Are you certain everyone on your list still lives?
 Yes.
 You two again?
 What list?
 Are you <i>very sure indeed</i> they live? Have you seen each one of them lately? Paid them a visit? You better watch out…
 Go home, brats.
 I keep track of everything.
 Do you keep many lists?
 Oh… you mean the one from my father's legacy. Yeah, I think so.
 I remember now. One list is enough.
 
 Clara
 "Erdem," "oynon," and "emshen" are the words people use for doctors.
 Sort of.
 So?
 Okay, don't laugh at me. Have you heard that five years ago, during the First Outbreak, kids made these—
 —horrible mixtures from ground pills, yes. "Shmowders." They can cure the plague.\nYes… I've heard. Worse, I've checked. So don't laugh at me either, dear colleague. What's the word… "erdem"?
 Holy shit… Sorry, excuse my language. So you've checked, then?
 I'm no erdem. "Emshen" would be more accurate… but not especially humble. Usually, we call surgeons "yargachins," as in butchers.
 You don't have to watch your tongue with me. Yes, I've checked. But if you wonder how it works, I don't know. I'm not a pharmacologist, and anyway, this place doesn't have a lab. If you ask me, it was ten thousand monkeys at a typewriter… Oh, I don't want to delve too deep into this. "There are more things in heaven and earth…"\nWhat we need is a process that follows the scientific method.
 Fair enough.
 All right, Burakh. Now's not the time for steppe linguistics… We'll talk later, colleague.
 Godspeed, oynon.
 If we meet again, that is.
 Pity. I wondered how that was possible… Thought you might know.
 ……
 I wonder what you've gotten yourself into, pal. Who did you dissect? You're so secretive, as though it was Simon's body! Heh. Now <i>that</i> would be a whole heap of trouble…
 ……
 All I know is that you couldn't have done anything low or selfish. I guess you tried to make a cure, too? A vaccine, or a serum? But why did you have to do it alone? Even I can't do everything on my own, and you…
 I'd search the houses next to the drugstore.
 What have you done to annoy the Kin so much? Robbed a grave? Whom did you take from them to provoke this hunt?
 Then again, it hardly matters now.
 Brilliant. I've waited so long to have an honest, heartfelt conversation with you, and now this. Oh Stakh, why must you always be so difficult?
 I could look after the sick. I'm not afraid of dirty work. But, actually, I have quite a few skills aside from mathematics.
 You are a brave woman. But looking after these patients… is pointless. They're all doomed.
 Like counting corpses? Fine work for a mathematician, in times like these.
 That doesn't mean they don't deserve care.
 True…
 But that would be a waste. A pointless sacrifice on your part. Suicide!
 I can sew, tie knots, tell stories, do card tricks, play cello, and repair equipment. Although, I doubt any of that would be useful here.\nUnfortunately, I can't walk around too much, on account of my leg.
 An impressive list.
 Still, you should go home now. There's nothing for you to do here.
 Such as?
 If that's irony I hear, It's misplaced. This is precisely the work I was tasked with at the Town Hall: statistics. Orderlies do the rounds and count the sick and dead, then I work with the data.
 Is that not enough for you?
 Sisyphean toil…
 We need to set up the facilities… An isolation ward, a real hospital… We need control over corpse disposal…\nTell me, how's it possible this town has never had a proper hospital? Don't women give birth here? Don't people get sick? I'm serious…
 We managed somehow. And no one complained.
 Murky
 Forget it, it's broken. Broken… They've destroyed water pumps all over the Town, the villains!\nThe Gorkhon water's foul, sure, but we don't drink it! What about washing, cleaning? It's fine when boiled. Cholera dies in boiled water.
 Who broke it?
 I helped one patient. Two to go.
 I helped two patients. At least one more is left.
 Kids have invented some way to "help me out."
 You know what, pal? Take this barrel to the cape, to Ravel's house.
 Huh? What for?
 For the good of the people.
 Cold Ones
 Burglar
 Burglar
 Hogger
 
 
 The urchins in the Warehouses say they've come up with some way to assist me. We'll… see about that.
 Notkin's Soul-and-a-Halves chart the infected areas on a daily basis. Those little blockheads! Still, a map might be useful…
 Father is dead. Oyun doesn't desire power. The Kin have two leaders now: Overseer Tycheek and Sahba.
 
 
 Tycheek's daughter, Taya, might still be alive. She's upstairs somewhere.
 
 Did you see who it was?
 Who?
 What did you play?
 I didn't see anyone.
 It was Mother's favorite melody. Her favorite. I think she wrote it herself. No one else could have learned it. Because she only played it for me, and no one else. Ever. Not even for Brother.
 So what?
 It's Liszt.
 That's the thing. It wasn't me.
 Who was it, then?
 Does it matter, though?
 I hear this melody often. I walk down the street and it comes from a window, or from a backyard, an attic, a cellar… I chase the sound, trying to locate the source. \nI always find the piano, lid raised. Someone has been there. But there's no one. No matter how hard I call.
 Mysterious.
 Someone must have overheard the melody. They're playing a trick on you.
 It's driving me mad. I've walked the whole Town back and forth, I've worn three pairs of shoes to rags, do you understand? Three, I'm serious. \nI wander at night, hoping to hear her, hoping to find whoever plays her melody. Who could know Mother so well? I won't believe it was <i>her…</i>
 Why?
 Well, I've heard the music too. So if it honestly weren't you...
 Well, because it's cruel. Believing that the souls of the dead still walk among us… is cruel towards them, don't you think? They deserve better.
 I guess.
 I don't believe in the immortal soul.
 What if it really <i>was</i> her spirit? Would that mean there is no death after all? But that's not even the point…\nI need to know for sure. Any answer would be a gift. It was her music, after all… Our music. If it's just some person playing, some person who was close to Mother, how could they do such a thing to me?
 It definitely is a person. One day, you'll catch them.
 If I ever hear this melody again, I'll try to figure it out.
 Why? Who would do something like this?
 I don't know.
 Does it matter?
 Why do you stare at me like that?
 It was a person, after all.
 It wasn't a person.
 …Who was it, then? I want to talk to them.
 Whoa! You <i>are</i> Big Vlad's daughter after all. That steel in your voice! It was Clara. The girl who—
 Just a random worker.
 Some little girl.
 How did you know?
 The musician was possessed.
 A girl who played told me.
 The piano kept playing music even when no one was in the room.
 —I know who Clara is.
 I don't think you do.
 You tasked her with the same errand, right?
 In that case… it means there's nothing after death. I see.
 I'm sorry.
 I'm not sure it's that simple.
 And the melody? How does he know it?
 I've no idea. He didn't seem like the sharpest tool in the shed.
 It's odd. He didn't understand it, either. He was frightened.
 What does she know about Mother?
 She mostly made fun of me. Didn't learn much.
 She said she was also looking for the ghost who played piano.
 So it <i>was</i> Mother. So she is still here. So there is still hope.
 You don't look relieved.
 I'm happy for you.
 I'm happy for your mother.
 Death brought no solace to her, then.
 Impossible.
 Whatever you say…
 Have you spoken to the girl? How is she?
 I think it's better to leave her alone for now.
 I came to take her away. The Town Hall is finally ready to find her a normal place to live.
 Can I help you somehow?
 No. Not now…\nThough, can you tell me what's going on with your water delivery system? Is it true the water's only for industrial purposes? Seriously…
 I don't know. We didn't have all this infrastructure back when I left. All the water was brought in from steppe springs.
 Gorkhon water is unsuitable for drinking. The Abattoir's too close.
 Why do you ask?
 No reason… Hopefully those are only silly rumors.\nForget it, Burakh. I have a splitting headache. If you have no urgent business, then we'll talk later. Later, later… Qui non proficit, deficit.
 Fair enough. Good luck, emshen.
 Be oylgono үgyb…
 Yes, Burakh?
 What's going on with the water, emshen?
 Why are the water barrels being guarded?
 One well-wisher came here today, reporting that someone infected the water barrels in the Middle Town.\nCertainly, it'd be nice to investigate. But when am I supposed to do that? How many barrels are in that area? Twenty? Thirty?
 But what if we do find an infected barrel?
 Overriding my authority, Saburov issued an order: All barrels in the Middle Town are to be destroyed. Those are his people guarding them… And, well, I'm powerless to challenge his orders.
 Why only the Middle Town?
 I've received samples from the Upper and Lower Town. All clear.\nAnd the Middle Town is clear, too! It's all nonsense. An idiotic craze, a crowd mad with paranoia! I have too much to do to go chasing shadows…
 But I thought…
 Burakh.
 The issue with the water keeps bothering me…
 No. No… For god's sake… Damn it! What have we done to deserve…\n…All right. I apologize for that outburst. Leave it to me. I'll examine it. Today… It won't take long.
 …And if it's infected?
 What?
 No… Nothing.
 I made a mistake. But it's my concern, not yours.
 What's this? Where did you get it?
 Something's wrong with this water.
 From a barrel in the Middle Town.
 Yup. That's my name.
 And a grave one.
 As in…?
 I know that. But what's the plan?
 "Water carriers"? Seriously, Burakh? We're quarantined! Although, I suppose we'll have to send someone—with proper security, of course…\nWhere, by the way, are those springs? Far from here?
 Quite. Still, erdem, about the water…
 It'll take them roughly three days to fetch the water.
 Water will now be given to people drop by drop, in a controlled fashion.\nSome luddites destroyed your water pipes tonight. Claimed it was contaminated by the river water. Granted, the Gorkhon <i>is</i> terribly polluted… but what if there was no contamination? Where are we supposed to get water now? For sanitary use, if nothing else…
 So those guards simply protect the barrels from the common people? To stop them from taking too much?
 There is talk of infected barrels…
 Drivel. I don't believe it for a second.
 Who started the rumor?
 There are steppe springs. Water carriers bring water from there.
 Fewer.
 But you could check them.
 But what if it's true?
 Yulia Liuricheva
 Mark Immortell
 Peter Stamatin
 Her questions are madness!\n<i>What</i> numbers? My work schedule… Who I'd like to be rid of… I'm an ordinary person—why ask me? I live a good life, I'm a productive member of the community, I've never hurt anyone…
 What did she say?
 Ugh. I guess I was lucky this time. I'm a good person! A good person…
 You're only realizing it now?
 But I've got kids… kids! These hands work to feed them both. I teach them to be good.
 What did you discuss?
 She has a stump of an imagination. Not that she lacks it completely, you know? She's not talentless. That's what stings the worst.\nThe inquisition only takes the talented. They look for children with potential, and then teach them… to look for openings.
 So you know the Inquisitor personally?
 If Peter were still alive, I'd drop that hideous Cathedral on her head for him. But now…
 You wouldn't even spare the Cathedral?
 I only hope the bitch doesn't touch Brother.
 Well… Perhaps she'll appreciate that you came to her voluntarily.
 …Eighty percent or so. Eighty-five if she's been to the Capital in May. Could have been even higher, but that bird story…
 Is that the probability of execution, or salvation?
 They're often indistinguishable from one another.
 Do you know her?
 Oh, so you've been invited to this performance, too?
 You mean the gallows? Reckon we'll spectate—or go on stage?
 All the world's a stage. Sometimes a gallows stage.\nI foresee a unique experience. We are about to witness a most exquisite one-woman show. I suggest you keep track of it, and learn her devices. It'll come in handy.
 Are inquisitors actors?
 Absolutely. Her role is difficult, though, so do play along. Improvise. Drop a brick or two, derail her with your silly trains of thought—you know the drill.
 That was a compliment so backhanded I could see through it.
 The bull is sacrificed at the Ragi Barrow. If I want to be there, I need to arrive before dawn.
 I'm a surgeon, not a butcher. My job is helping people, not cutting beef.
 Olkho-o
 Bulls don't get sand pest. Why?\n\nAlthough, to be honest, I care much less about the <i>why</i> then about the <i>how.</i> How can I use it, if at all? A puzzle that can only be solved with a microscope.
 The udurgh's ear is in an abandoned steppe village—whatever that means. Time to whisper in it.
 Seems like the dark cloud hangs over Alexander today, not Katerina.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 One Kindred attacked me first. Three are left.
 Three more steppe people are standing watch over Stakh at the Warehouses.\n
 Two more Kindred are waiting for Stakh at the Warehouses.
 One more Kindred is standing watch over Stakh at the Warehouses.
 Damn… I took care of everyone who was threatening Stakh. He's free to do whatever he pleases today. \n\nI hope he uses this opportunity to go home and get decent sleep.
 They were camping on Rubin's doorstep again.\n\nI did not wait to see what they were planning to do. They're done for.
 What do you plan to do about us, kheerkhen?
 Now is not the time for love.
 There is no "us." There's me, and there's you. Deal with your life yourself.
 …What makes you think I love you?
 Then why are you following me?
 Well…
 Baygalday, you're breaking my heart… if only that were true! You don't even know how cruel your words are.
 You are an Herb Bride. Betrothed to the Earth, not to men. You're not a creature of love…
 Ugh. Spare me.
 You know full well we're not the kind who love. It's not about love at all, khөөrkhen. I'd rather live than love.
 Live, then. No one's stopping you.
 So what's your actual name?
 Why do you ask? You'll remember it yourself, when the time comes.
 Fair enough.
 You're a good dancer, Bride. Bayarlaa to you for the good harvest.
 I've decided that I won't bother you anymore.
 Thank heavens…
 Can you <i>please</i> tell me your name now?
 Where's the bull?
 What matters is, you got used to me. Now, you won't be so scared when the time comes. It will be easier for you. So have no regrets.
 When what time comes?
 I'm tired of your riddles. What do you want?
 Scared of what? I'm not afraid of you, and I doubt I ever will be.
 Be khara, he went into the steppe. He said he'll be back.
 "He said…" Wait, today?
 Yamar berkhe!
 Don't worry, khөөrkhen. Your booha will return. Unlike me.
 Listen… whatsyername…
 Good.
 Nara. <i>Narana.</i> So you don't remember me at all?
 Nara… Nara… No. I don't.
 You're an Herb Bride. Earth's flesh. I never had much contact with your kind.
 You will have to kill me at some point. I told you—I'm yours, yargachin.
 What?!
 You know what? If I ever see you again, I sure will. Now oshysh daa, be on your way, basaghan!
 Are you sure you want to know?
 Yeah, yeah. Tell me already.
 Honestly? Not really.
 Don't be sad, and don't be frightened when it happens. We do not fear death. Tiimel daa, we're indifferent to it. But it will help you understand.
 I think I understand now.
 So that's what our connection is…
 Let someone else kill you. Ask the Worms, maybe. Murder comes naturally to them.
 You cut me wrong. You're opening the spleen. But it's too early.
 I'm cutting you right. Bear with me and be quiet.
 [cut down and to the right]
 You won't see the future this way.
 I know the future already. I'm looking for different answers now.
 [cut up]
 There is no pain,  khөөrkhen. You are yargachin. What your blade cuts is not a body. You're tracing emptiness. A predestined Line.
 [cut down]
 [cut left]
 Did you find it?
 Almost. I can almost see why you people, who devour meat raw, are unaffected by this disease.
 [cut right]
 We love you, yargachin. You're doing everything right.\nYou're getting closer now… Soon we become whole with you. A Kharanghe…
 Who were you in life? Did you dance with Earth?
 [cut up]
 Can't you see? I'm dancing with Earth now.\nYou're cutting me open so that Earth may live. This is how it's been since ancient times. \nYou're doing everything right. I'm so thankful…
 [cut up]
 [keep cutting left]
 It hurts! Zobo, zobo, unente, aaaah! It hurts!!
 [keep cutting]
 [change direction, cut up]
 Why do they do it? Why do they build such unbearable towns?\nThe Earth doesn't want this town. It's killing her like you're killing me now.
 I'm not killing you. You're still alive.
 [cut down]
 What do you see?
 Earth. It's… she's breathing.
 [cut up]
 I'm made of Earth.
 No. You're made of flesh, like a normal person.
 [cut down]
 I'll be alive afterwards, too. My blood will trickle down into the Earth, and I will become an herb. I hope it's swevery…
 [cut straight]
 [cut down]
 This <i>is</i> earth. Earth is flesh. Hot blood flows through it. It gives birth, gets sick, endures, and suffers.\nWe are flesh of the Earth's flesh, yargachin. And so is the disease killing you. But it's of no danger to us while we're connected to the Earth.\nNow you've seen it.
 Yes.
 [cut up]
 Do you see it? What do you see?
 It… it does look like Earth. What is it?
 It's beautiful.
 Nara
 I'm sorry about your loss. Still, think bright thoughts. Earth takes her due, but gives in kind.\nHave you now remembered me? Do you remember our connection?
 Ah. It's you, basaghan.
 Your dress is even more torn than before. You danced with all your energy, huh?
 I needed to make Earth split open. To lay your father to rest.
 I see…
 Bayarlaa. Let Mother Boddho caress your step.
 I'm all yours, kheerkhen.
 What is your name?
 I've no need for such gifts.
 So you don't remember at all?
 No. I honestly don't.
 You know? I don't believe you. I feel like this is all some sort of a prank. Or game, maybe.
 This is what you told me once: "I often dream of salt. Either its taste, or color, or whole salt pits, or holding some in my pinched fingers." Do you believe me now?
 Wait… It can't be!
 I never told anyone about it. Even my friends. Even Lara doesn't know.
 Baarkhane, baarkhane… Forget Lara… That's not why I'm following you.
 Why then?
 Ene shee yuun khun gheeshebshe… But you're not heartless, however cruel. I won't leave you. I hold no grudge against you.\nJust mind this: When you finally remember; when you realize why you need me, do not hold a grudge, either. Promise?
 I'm not the type to hold grudges.
 I can't promise anything.
 Don't send me away. We are bound, you and I. I am yours. Remember that, at least.
 Yamar berkhe basaghan bai! I couldn't forget even if I tried...
 Don't try to bind me. I told you already, I don't need you.
 All right. I'll remember.
 Finally, we're back together. I've been waiting for you, Burakh. Will you have me now?
 Who are you?
 You mistook me for someone else, basaghan.
 Wait… I seem to recognize your face.
 Don't you remember me, kholboön? Well, I remember you. And I remember your words. So, will you have me now?
 You are an Herb Bride. We can't have a relationship.
 You have a very clear speech for a Bride. Do you live in the Town?
 Your hands are so heavy. Shh, don't touch me yet. Or else the dress will tear, and it's no good.\nThe tears in the dress must appear on their own, during the dance. Just like the Earth is torn apart when it releases herbs.
 I'm not touching you.
 Relax, I'll be careful. I'm just checking if you're real.
 So, will you have me now? Will we be joined forever?
 But… Who are you?
 No, basaghan. Something is off about you. What do you really want?
 Were we… lovers?
 Fine. I'll wait for you to remember me. We'll meet again soon. I'll find you.\nFor now, try to remember who I am, kholboön. Segne dehe, or there'll be trouble.
 Don't worry.
 I will wait for you, basaghan.
 You are beautiful.
 Living Blood
 This is special blood. I can make special medicine from it.
 Any trickle of blood seeps from Olonngo. This is the blood I was looking for. One vial is enough to seriously invigorate myself or brew someone salvation.
 Murky's not in the Lair. I think there's an abandoned train car she stays in sometimes. Maybe she's there?
 Murky's fine. Thank heavens.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Murky is dead.
 Murky's not in the Lair. I think there's an abandoned train car she stays in sometimes. Maybe she's there?
 Murky. My sunshine. You're fine…
 
 
 Where's Murky?
 Day Four,\nin which the Theatre observes a full house.
 Day Five,\nin which the Haruspex fully embraces the struggle of invention, and a sacrifice is offered.
 Day Six,\nin which the answers reveal themselves if the Haruspex is brave enough not to seek them.
 Day Seven,\nin which new actors enter the stage, and the old ones reveal themselves in unexpected ways.
 Day Eight,\nin which the Haruspex finally realizes how deep the rifts go.
 Day Nine,\nin which new blood is injected into the Town, disturbing the old.
 Day Ten,\nin which the plague finally stops playing to lose.
 Day Eleven,\nin which the Haruspex looks for the courier.
 Day Twelve,\nin which the lights die out.
 Unfortunately, some diseases don't.
 But it's not cholera we're dealing with.
 Hell if I know! People have turned to wolves now, packs of wolves. Some destroy water pumps, others look for the carrier; some stock up on kerosene, planning to burn houses… Everyone has their own truth.\nI also heard of a suicidal tagloor. They don't wait for death… too scared.
 What tagloor?
 Huh.
 Well, it's like a community… a steppe word. I don't know the details.
 Wrong. A "tagloor" are a group of people who share a common fate.
 I know what a tagloor is. What you describe is psychosis.
 Well, if you don't know the details, stop spreading rumors. And drink from the Gullet or the Guzzle. The water is better there.
 Orders.
 Because I told you to.
 Eh? And who deserves this treasure, I wonder? For what service?\nNo way in hell! My orders are clear. If the water is clear, it's precious. A bottle per day. For everyone. The Committee's orders. And it's just fair, too.
 All right, all right… Whatever you say.
 It was a test. Well done.
 Rumor is, steppe people infected the barrels last night. Don't take offense, sir! Might also have been the plague-bearer, the bone-legged wench. \nRemember the hunt for her? Well, where there's smoke, there's fire. Guess there was a good reason behind the hunt, after all.
 You've lived long enough to have wrinkles, yet you still believe someone would infect people on purpose?
 So the Kin is to blame for everything? Great. Go on, tell me more. I'm all ears.
 What a lady… Always up to all sorts of mischief, despite the bone legs!
 Don't make fun of me, doctor. You live to my age, you'll sing a different tune.\nEven the professor from the Capital, a book smart man, isn't laughing anymore. He realizes now our traditions should be respected. Yeah… You don't have to believe them deep down, but show some respect.
 So what does that professor of yours say?
 If you don't believe it, who are you protecting the barrel from?
 Oh, I don't! But an order came through this morning, barrels must be guarded—as many as we have manpower to guard. Tough that the Master is the only one with enough free men…\nMaybe it's to protect the water from someone infecting it, too. Can't be too sure.
 What would be the point, if it's already infected?
 I've been told to stand guard here, 'cause those are our last sips of clear water. The water pipes were destroyed last night. The fools decided the infection's waterborne, from the Gorkhon.\nIt's polluted, true, with blood and innards from the Abattoir.
 The Gorkhon flows in the opposite direction!
 Master's orders. Very thoughtful of him. And Saburov issued an order, too. One bottle per person, and not a drop more.
 Doing your best to drive everyone nuts, aren't you?
 Sounds right. Dying of thirst is better than dying of sand pest. Less tortuous.
 Sounds bad… So now what?
 An order's been issued: all barrels are to be examined. If anything suspicious is found, all barrels from that part of town are to be seized. Can't be too sure.\nBachelor Dankovsky is in charge of the process. It's all up to him. Hence my question: Did he send you to inspect the barrels?
 It's growing colder. Have you noticed?
 There was a water pump by your house. I fixed it. You have water now.
 I haven't had a minute of rest. I suppose the running around warms me.
 Cub, that water's only good for washing floors. It's from the river. It reeks of the Abattoir!
 It's from the tributaries—the Gullet and the Guzzle. The water there is less polluted, because it comes from the steppe.
 It does <i>not.</i> It's normal water.
 Those fools destroyed the pumps on impulse, of course. But where else could the disease have come from, if not the Abattoir? Think about it.\nHonestly, I'm surprised you and Dankovsky haven't turned that place upside down already! Even that girl, Clara, mentioned the Abattoir…
 Fine. You'll have your barrel.
 Oh, I'll definitely go there at some point.
 I understand, yes. Without fresh water, we're all doomed.
 There's a water pump next to your house. Want me to fix it?
 I need drinking water. Lots of it. Pumps really aren't a good source, Cub… Whatever they say, now is not the time to take risks.
 How much is "lots"?
 Oh, nonsense! I don't believe in imaginary poisoners!
 But what if it's true?
 I know perfectly well who started this silly rumor! It's just muddy water. And I need it desperately, Cub! For the people!
 It's dangerous…
 Oh, it's not so bad! Unlike dying of thirst.
 Lara!
 What next? Shall we become terrified of one another? Too anxious to eat bread? We can't succumb to fear, Cub! The disease isn't the worst part of an outbreak.
 What is?
 The way people transform! Don't let fear overtake you! Fear is the worst disease. It weakens your spirit and welcomes illness!
 No. I mean… Yes, it would be nice of you, but that's not what I need.
 Why?
 Actually, I fixed the water pump next to your house. You're all set.
 Oh, but listen! Thank you, Cub, that was very thoughtful, but… it's not enough.
 Why?
 Oh. I thought you'd appreciate it.
 I'll need water. Plenty of water. Get me a barrel, Cub, please! Have it delivered here. You're a doctor. You have special authority.
 So I'll, what, drag it here? I'm not a draft horse.
 But you said yourself they're guarded. No one would just give me one.
 Still, don't drink from that barrel. All right?
 Who started it?
 The idiots who hunt for the bone-legged carrier! Or was she clay-legged? What's her name…
 Shabnak-adyg.
 Yes, exactly. A shabnak-adyg. Do you seriously want me to deny people water because of a fairy tale?
 Lara! It's risky! Think straight!
 Lara, I need you alive!
 I never could beat you in an argument.
 It's dangerous!
 Whatever. Do as you want…
 Death favors the bold… Fear is a natural shield.
 Fine. Share this water with your guests. But you, yourself, will drink only what is distributed in bottles. Got it?
 So?
 It didn't work out. I'm sorry, Gravel.
 You won't receive a clean barrel. Everyone is equal when it comes to the threat of thirst, homeless or not.
 …Are you implying there were unclean barrels, too?
 Yes. Bringing you one of those obviously would have been a disservice.
 No. Just a slip of the tongue. Forget it.
 This can't be true…
 Dankovsky determined it was.
 Seems like it.
 This means someone <i>deliberately</i> spreads the disease. Please be careful with that plan of yours, Gravel. Don't let in strangers, not anymore.
 That's fine, I'll live…
 Screaming through the walls? Why?
 I guess they're bored, too. I'd also like to scream, but I don't! I want to, but I'm silent. I want to cry, yet I laugh. I'm inside-out girl!
 Well, it's good you're safe in here. But I guess your people are unhappy? They want to go outside?
 Andrey Stamatin
 Anna Angel
 Aspity
 Bad Grief
 Big Vlad
 Eva Yan
 Georgiy Kain
 Yulia Lyuricheva
 Vlad the Younger
 Capella
 Katerina Saburova
 Khan
 Grace
 Mark Immortell
 Murky
 Notkin
 Peter Stamatin
 Stakh Rubin
 Alexander Saburov
 Sticky
 Victor Kain
 You will have an opportunity to finish some tasks tomorrow. However, certain nocturnal events will be over by dawn.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nDeath toll over the past 24 hours: 9 people.\nGone missing: 15 people.
 Taya Tycheek
 No way. Forget it.
 Heron
 Water Guard
 Lara wants to turn her Shelter into a... well, shelter for the homeless. To do that, she needs a personal water barrel.\n\nOnly no one would let me just take it. I think this will require cunning.
 No barrel for Lara. Or for the rest of the Middle Town…
 Lara has the barrel, but I still have a sample of muddy water.
 Very much so. If I wasn't alive, who would be superior to everyone else here, I wonder?
 Seriously. Say, kid, do you know who, or what, an "udurgh" is?
 You are to call me like they did on the outside: Mother Superior. That's 'cause I'm better than everyone.
 Yes, Your Highness.
 Yamar berkhe basaghan bai! That's one smart girl!
 Ime beshe, it is not.
 Strawberry… It's a nice white berry. I saw it when I was in the Tower. It smells so yummy!\nAnd raspberry. It can also be red or white, but in truth, it's yellow. Yamar goe bee, so pretty! So tasty!
 Don't think I can manage that. This town's never seen any strawberries or raspberries.
 Never eaten those. I've only seen them in books.
 You're surprisingly eloquent. As though you grew up in the Town.
 A wish… Well, I only have one…
 A wish… Well, I only have one…
 Be kharanab, you're a smart girl. Stay here for now. Wait some more.
 Bayartay, Your Superiorness. See you.
 It's not like you can stop us anyway. We have no plans to fit on our hands. If you don't take it, another doctor will. A less squeamish one.
 Why do you have to be so stubborn...
 You won't hold us all back.
 Fine. Have it your way. Here's the deal then: I'll bring you protective medicine, enough for a couple of kids. And they'll be the only ones doing the scouting. Is that clear?
 I failed to attend the sacrificial rite.
 Aglaya Lilich
 Bachelor
 Alexander Block
 Changeling
 Foreman Oyun
 Lara Ravel
 Maria Kaina
 Taya Tycheek
 Here's what I think. From now on, you will have a small additional burden—maybe not even a burden at all. A trifle, really.
 Well?
 Hunger comes into play.
 Meaning?
 The actor goes out into the Town, searching for inspiration, a role. "He walks down his paths." That's what you're about to do.
 Why do this in the Town? Why not here in the Theatre, where you can see?
 Your burden is heavy, Artemy Burakh. How can we show that?\nImagine rolling a boulder uphill, muscles trembling. What do you feel?
 Unbearable exhaustion. Even without the boulder…
 A question for the ages, poignant in every generation: How can death be overcome? In our play, it's achieved by dividing a person.
 What do you mean?
 Well. If you're a surgeon, your sense of touch must be very keen.\nWhat is this item? What is it <i>about?</i> What's its point? It's warm, slippery, quite heavy, smells of dampness and blood. What is it?
 A liver.
 The next thing I'm taking from you is hope. Simple as that.
 Aren't you going a bit too far?
 Hunger, dear Burakh. This time, it's hunger again. In case the first limit seemed too lenient to you.
 It didn't.
 You know how it works, right? You are Artemy Burakh. Finish your story and try not to die.
 Please help me understand. It's absurd. You're making it easier and easier for me to die, while my goal is to overcome death. Meaning, <i>not die.</i> It's a contradiction.
 Exhaustion. Exhaustion again.
 Yeah… exhaustion again.
 You're holding props, but I want to see real objects. Things turn to dry cotton wool in your hands—I want to see them alive.
 But I'm not an actor. I'm just speaking with you out of curiosity.
 Hunger. It's hunger again.\n<i>Gave a cry of lamentation,\nGave a scream of pain and famine…</i>
 …
 I may be mistaken, but it looks like you're just playing puppeteer.\nThat's it, right? People are just puppets to you. Dolls. Admit it. You haven't learned anything, have you?
 I'm a student of a certain famous director…
 I <i>have</i> made a cure. A couple hours ago.
 An hour ago, I was brought a vial and a letter from one Stanislav Rubin. He claims the medicine is a tested serum—<i>the</i> serum—and that the Town owes its existence to you. Any comment?
 It can't be… He doesn't have the skill.
 …So that's what he was doing!
 I don't deserve the honor.
 Isidor Burakh
 Simon Kain
 The Eighth
 That little imp… The dastardly creature! Did it slip out? Did you see it?
 What?
 
 
 I must see her immediately. Such is my Line.
 …Yet they, too, are controlled by someone. Insane to think what kind of teeth you need for <i>that.</i>
 
 
 Where's Aglaya?
 
 
 It's you… I've found you.
 But I've done everything right! What's going on?
 Totum revolutum. "TO-tum re-vo-LU-tum." No… Damn it… "re-VO-lu-tum"…
 What's wrong with you, emshen?
 One's as bad as the other… and the other, and the other. One thinks he's a head above the rest, but loses heart. The other's light on his feet, but turns a blind eye to everything that matters. And none of you can save everyone.\nPlay it as you like. I'll be the one who cleans up your mess after, anyway.
 I never volunteered to be the first. You're welcome to go on stage yourself.
 There. I've reaped my harvest. Off we go, the two of us… into the wider world. We're inseparable now, my Fellow Traveler.
 Where are we going, exactly?
 Something's wrong. I'm in the Theatre again. Why? What does it mean for me?
 A generous reward awaits you in the Fund. If you don't claim it before tomorrow evening, it will be distributed among the poor.
 A reward awaits you in the Fund. If you don't claim it before tomorrow evening, it will be distributed among the poor.
 A meager reward awaits you in the Fund. If you don't claim it before tomorrow evening, it will be distributed among the poor.
 Nothing awaits you in the Fund.
 THE DAY IS OVER
 
 A friend of yours is being hunted. Come dawn, you won't be able to help him anymore.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 3209 people.\nGone missing: 24 people.\nCommitted suicide: 32 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 401 people.\n\n
  
 Your inaction protected the Flank from infection.
 Your actions led to the Flank becoming infected.
 Mark Immortell
 
 
 
 How's Aglaya?
 One courier was caught in a crossfire between soldiers and mutineers. I can follow the traces of the fight.
 One courier was caught in a crossfire between soldiers and mutineers. I think I've found someone who might know of his fate.
 They won't tell me talk to the courier until I patch up the bandit. Or force my way through…
 Time to talk to the courier.
 One courier is still out there, in the streets, bleeding. How do I look for him? Damn it!
 
 
 The last courier is looking for me. He's injured and needs a doctor… No, a surgeon.
 The wounded courier needed me. But, once again, I was too late.
 
 Polyhedron
 
 THE DAY IS OVER
 Today was a turning point. Fates are decided at midnight. If you want to protect someone, take care of them before nightfall.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 343 ppl.\nGone missing: 36 ppl.\n\nOverall death toll: 26 ppl.\n\n
 You've failed to protect the Crude Sprawl from infection.
 You've managed to protect the Crude Sprawl from infection.
 THE DAY IS OVER
 What’s done is done. The night will be uneventful. Keep on working—or, take this time to rest.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 3544 people.\nGone missing: 38 people.\nCommitted suicide: 11 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 3621 people.\n\n
 The hunt for your friend continues. Come dawn, you won't be able to help him anymore. Apart from that, the night will be uneventful.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 3544 people.\nGone missing: 38 people.\nCommitted suicide: 11 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 3621 people.\n\n
 You managed to protect the Bridge Square from infection.
 You failed to protect the Bridge Square from infection.
 You managed to grasp a crucial hint, and soon your research has a chance to bear fruit.
 A crucial hint is about to elude you. If you don't find it until morning, the future of your research will find itself in Fate’s hands.
 THE DAY IS OVER
 A crucial encounter will happen in the steppe this night. The page is about to turn. All business you deem important needs to be finished before dawn.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 702 people.\nGone missing: 96 people.\nCommitted suicide: 112 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 7277 people.\n\n
 THE DAY IS OVER
 Time moves faster, yet there are fewer discontinuities. You'll have a chance to finish important business at night, or tomorrow.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 1263 people.\nGone missing: 205 people.\nCommitted suicide: 142 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 8121 people.\n\n
 THE DAY IS OVER
 Tomorrow, everything changes, so it may be unwise to put off important business. A new pantomime is rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 288 people.\nGone missing: 389 people.\nCommitted suicide: 299 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 9783 people.\n\n
 THE DAY IS OVER
 Daylight and waking life mean less and less. A new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 3342 people.\nGone missing: 206 people.\nCommitted suicide: 90 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 10161 people.\n\n
 THE DAY IS OVER
 This is it. The trap is shut. Finish all your business before morning. A new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 434 people.\nGone missing: 481 people.\nCommitted suicide: 36 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 13539 people.\n\nThey shut down the Fund. They shut down the Hospital. There’s no one left to save.
 The trap is shut. This noose will strangle you and Aglaya both, unless you flee.\n\nA new pantomime is being rehearsed at the Theatre.\n\nInfected over the past 24 hours: 434 people.\nGone missing: 481 people.\nCommitted suicide: 36 people.\n\nOverall death toll: 13539 people.\n\nThey shut down the Fund. They shut down the Hospital. There’s no one left to save.
 Name and occupation.
 Artemy Burakh, doctor.
 Oh… a doctor.\nOn General Block's orders, the local public fund will now be managed by the military. Take your payment as usual. Equal shares for everyone.
 You're the last people who should be managing this.
 A surgeon from the hospital. I came to get my pay.
 There is a schism in the Kin. Apostates run rampant in the Termitary. To restore the Kin, the gangrene must be cut off…\n\nNo… There must be another way.
 What do they want from you? A deed, I know. What deed?
 They want blood, not deeds. They always do!
 I could return to the Termitary and show the Kin my strength. But I believe there is another way, a path of patience and wisdom.\n\nPerhaps I'll soon see a way to reconcile the Kin with themselves.
 
 
 
 I've seen the Kin's guts. I know now how to touch the apostates' hearts and convince them to come back.
 The schism is no more. Time to speak with the Kin.
 
 
 They say that true men are either obeyed, or hated. Thanks to Father, some follow our family, while others dream of ripping out our throats, in his words.\nWhat is dignity, Master Burakh?
 Self-hatred.
 Did you come to gawk? That's all right… all right… Here I stand. I stood my ground this whole life… and I'll stand now. Fate has robbed me of my wife and children, and now… well…\nI wonder what my old age will be like… Yes. But you haven't left me… I know you haven't…
 Your wife…
 Officer
 A herbal infusion. Drink to reveal places and events hidden from naked eyes.
 This herbal infusion reveals places and events hidden from naked eyes. But the town is currently quiet. I should try later.
 
 Dora
 We're having an important conversation. The most important conversation of our lives, maybe. Can you leave us alone?
 What are you talking about?
 I've found one survivor. Several more to go.
 I've found two survivors.
 I've found three survivors.
 Yulia Liuricheva
 Yulia Liuricheva
 It was a pathologic change in many lives, mine included. It filled me to the brim.
 What…?
 According to a certain treatise on war, each type of terrain requires a particular approach. If there's a mountain ahead, a river to the right, starvation to the left, and the foe ahead, the terrain is called "desperate."\nThe treatise gives only one piece of advice on overcoming it: Fight.
 Makes sense.
 We're wasting years copying what already existed, and have no time to add anything original on top.
 That's a shame.
 It feels wrong for me to make confessions.
 No pressure.
 I'll have you know we used to want to change the world. And perhaps we did, a bit… But lately, it seems to me that all we're doing is trying to translate someone's childhood traumas and dreams.\nWake that child up, and it all evaporates.
 What do you mean?
 It's a capricious child. Every day, it demands more strength and attention than I could possibly have. Yet every minute spent on it is repaid in spades! I feel like I'm about to burst.\nIt stole my time, but gave me a family.
 Cheers…?
 i constantly feel like a messenger who is to be shot for bringing bad news
 …
 head deep in the second outbreak\ni feel like i've grasped the idea of death\nextracted its essence, that is present in the living too\nnow i need to write my observations down\nwhile i am yet unliving
 …
 Would it have seen the light of day without me? Most certainly. But I hope my participation made it better! I dissolved in it, and breathed it...\n...Where is reality going now?
 In the right direction.
 I still struggle to evaluate my degree of responsibility for all this. I offered so many ideas, yet made so few decisions. So how much of the result is on me?
 Are you asking me?
 I accidentally shifted the trajectory of my life. This world wields uncanny power that changes anyone who touches it. Playing it is a challenge, making it—even more so.\nI'm not sure if I made a terrible mistake when I rushed into it.
 …
 I failed to hold all that was dear to me. Put it all on this altar. The sticky terror makes me lose control of my thoughts. But it's too late to give up. I go all in.
 …
 My main fear is missing the opportunity to do something that matters. This is my door to leaving <i>something</i> after I go. I gave up everything to go through this door.\nBut I don't really know what's on the other side.
 Are you two twins…?
 im here because theyre dead\nwho is to die so we\nstop failing\nis it all right that\n               im happy
 …
 I like it. It's the story of strong people in a tough situation. A story of responsibility, the will to cleanse your doubts, the power to go on despite the exhaustion and mistakes, the wrongness and incomprehensibility. It's hard, but meaningful.\nAnd I am happy to be here.
 Good for you.
 Each new person was a hope of miraculous salvation. But a year ago we finally faced it: no one had any obligations to become our savior.
 …What about me?
 Five years of my life. Several hours of your leisure.
 …
 Embarking on a journey, we often think that the goal is to get somewhere. And it may take years of wandering to see that it was never about the destination at all.
 Oh come on.
 I think tackling the fourth wall so directly is kind of tasteless in the modern world.
 Are you being serious?
 My true desire was for this town to never have a direction or goal marker, not even once. It's intellectually offensive.\nWho do you have to be to thrust a map marker under a free person's nose, saying, <i>"Here is your goal. You're too lazy and stupid to figure it out on your own, and I am not without mercy towards lesser minds, so I'll do the work for you. Go there. Go and don't forget to thank me for choosing your goal for you. Love, The Powers That Be."</i>—?
 But that's not how it turned out.
 I love you all…
 …
 Hello, doctor. Can I shake your hand?
 What for?
 Yulia Lyuricheva has disturbing news for me.
 
 
 The Powers That Be have sent a special commissar our way, one that people refer to as an "inquisitor."
 Inquisitorial Coupon
 The sword is mightier than the pen… unless it's an inquisitorial pen.
 Food is only sold for these now.
 
 It has never happened to me before.
 So she has a reflection too, huh? Surprising. Seemed like the type who wouldn't be reflected in mirrors.
 Where once a person was, now but a gap remains. This rupture will not mend.
 Farewell.
 Deviser
 
 
 Father left me a measly inheritance: a sort of "vessel" with a couple of herbs and a strange list of names inside.
 Reflection
 Oh well…
 Aglaya's Reflection
 
 
 That was my line, emshen.
 Spare me, oynon. Don't pretend you haven't done all those things.
 Yes.
 What for?
 The Army is leaving, dragging their ungodly cannons with them. The general needs to make one final shot. He is loathe to shoot people, but <i>something</i> must be destroyed.
 And?
 He was delivering Aglaya's papers to the soldiers. Her orders.
 Exactly. And he would have done it, too. Stubborn. Devoted. Selfless. Like all of us… September is heady this year, as you people like to say.
 Then why…
 Heady indeed.
 Do you condemn me?
 Does it matter, emshen? We've known each other for a week. You've got blood on your hands. So do I.
 No.
 First, tell me why. Then I'll think.
 I won't let them shoot the Polyhedron. I'll do anything within my power to stop it. It's the only living thing around here, if you think about it.
 You would know, oynon. Shifting the boundary between death and life is, like, your whole shtick, isn't it?
 Why did you kill him?
 I tried to ask him nicely, but he wouldn't give me the papers. A zealot. I wonder what she did to him…
 Well… she's good at convincing people.
 Why are you here?
 Where are the papers?
 Why do you want them?
 I have my own plans for my hometown.
 I want to keep them. As a memory of the commissar.
 See the ashes over there, on the floor? Barely managed to do it before you arrived. Smart of me to burn them rather than eat them, I think. You're a surgeon—you would have dug it all out of my gut.
 I would have.
 Unlike you, I don't kill people for papers.
 But why? Why burn them?
 If there are no papers, there is no bombardment. The mutiny is doomed—most of the soldiers adore their general. \nAnd Block, like me, is a man of formality. He wouldn't waste ammo without proof.
 So what shall we do now?
 
 
 This tower is the only valuable thing around here. Perhaps all three hundred years of this wretched town's history happened just so that this flower could bloom atop this pile of shit.
 Mind your tongue, oynon.
 Frightened him, of course. What else?
 Three hundred years? It's much older. Several thousand, maybe. The Abattoir has been its head since time immemorial.
 Once, maybe, but now the Abattoir has become the Town's putrid ass. The head is elsewhere. That head is what we must preserve.
 What for?
 Why do you care so much? The Tower is deranged. It's lunacy.
 I'll tell you. I will—the way I'd tell a close, intimate friend. Have I ever told you about my Thanatica?
 I don't think so.
 Then listen.\nI had a lab in the Capital. We studied the dynamics and progression of death. If you pardon the big words, we tried to defeat it. Or at least figure it out enough that people could decide for themselves whether their time has come—or not.
 Were you successful?
 I can't share the details. We don't have time. And anyway—you'd have to be me, and live there two weeks with my head on your shoulders to notice and realize all that I have.\nTrust me. Destroying the Tower would delay our triumph over death indefinitely.
 So in order to defeat death, it must be preserved?
 I've heard it was shut down by the government.
 Big words indeed.
 I don't care about the outside world. We have to sacrifice the Tower so that my town can live—and give birth to more towers like this one in the future. You hear me, emshen?
 I hear you. Loud and clear. But you're an idiot, Artemy Burakh. A skilled surgeon, maybe, but a lousy doctor. \nAnd a terrible player, as well. You waste your final move sucking the poison from the wound, when you could have strangled the snake once and for all.
 You heard me loud and clear.
 I may be myopic, yes. I'm always thinking with my heart… or my hands.
 Precisely.
 I understand, oynon. I'll think about what you said.
 No. I can see that you believe what you say, but you haven't convinced me.
 Yes.
 Are all these corpses your fault?
 Yes…
 How did you kill so many soldiers?
 There was a fight. The commander's soldiers cornered a group of mutineers, demanded they lay down their arms. The mutineers began to shoot. Look! All those wounds are from bullets…\nI was following the general. Heard the shooting. Came here, tried to heal them. I have a healing touch—didn't you know?
 So how many have you healed?
 What an amazing act of healing. There must be at least twelve corpses here.
 Over the course of… what, eleven days? Three hundred or so… I haven't counted. But today… today I couldn't heal anyone. I was late…
 Three hundred?!
 That's like thirty times more than I have.
 But you can save so many more. You have the panacea.
 You think so?
 I know.
 Still. Their death is your fault.
 Are you scared? Try telling me more. It'll help me understand myself, too.
 Why?
 I think I was counting on a miracle. Expecting the Town itself to aid me…
 Well, of course! Only miracles can save us. I've always said that…
 I don't know how to explain. Maybe you can do it better.
 No, please, keep talking. You have to keep talking…
 Why?
 It'll help you figure out the truth.
 What's the truth?
 "Nothing rings truer than a lie," huh?
 It felt like the Town would inevitably save itself… Just because it's so <i>big.</i> And big means strong, right?
 I believed that the solution was there, and all I had to do was find it.
 Well, maybe it's true?
 You know what you need to do, don't you? I can tell you do. You said so yourself.
 I'll tear the thorn from Earth's body. The Tower must be destroyed.
 I'll debilitate the Town… to protect what little of itself remains. To give it a future, of a sort.
 I'll spill rivers of blood… as was foretold. All Burakhs break bones, rend tissue, and vivisect still-living organs. A Burakh must spill blood.
 You said it yourself. You know what you have to do. So do it. Such is your fate.\nI guess that's the only way to overcome it: acceptance and understanding. Without understanding, you would be enslaved by it—but now? You might actually master it. And life will continue. And there will be a future.\nYou'll do it. Won't you?
 I will.
 Time to turn off the lights.
 Changeling
 I can't feel my legs…
 Let me check… They seem fine. Warm.
 I've failed utterly. I think I've lost all my powers.
 Why?
 Don't judge anyone. Don't punish anyone.
 Yeah, right. That good book of yours got any more wisdom?
 Next you'll say it wasn't you.
 It <i>wasn't</i> me…
 Wasn't it, sister death?
 What happened here?
 How do you do it? Do you have some sort of evil eye, where you can kill people just by looking at them?
 …Why are you like this?
 Don't you deserve it?
 See? You're confessing, all on your own!
 "Don't judge anyone. Don't punish anyone." Right?
 So you came when it was already over? Who won? Where's the general?
 I don't know…
 Tell me: who are you?
 I'm a child of God. God reveals himself to people by my hands.
 And modest, too.
 I don't know anything anymore. My faith is gone. It used to be so firm. And people believed in me, too—no one doubted my sainthood. But now, I'm just not sure…
 Have you really been saving people? How many have you cured?
 Sure it's not the devil?
 Not yet... But you've figured it out, haven't you? You know how to make the cure?
 I may know the way. Only it's horrible.
 Have I? I know now that the world is very different from how I saw it before. But what if I'm still missing something?
 Maybe. Now tell me. There was a courier following the general…
 You tell me.
 You mean I'll miraculously discover the truth just by talking?
 You mean the one in the water over there? He didn't drown—he was shot, too. Otherwise I could have…
 What? In the water? So the papers are destroyed…
 Are they important, those papers?
 That's all right. He's not the last courier. But I need to hurry…
 They were meant to persuade your general to fire in the right direction.
 Forget it. Guess it's fate.
 That's it. Time to go back.
 Odongh
 So many corpses… What happened here? Where's the courier?
 
 Halt!
 Okay, okay.
 Wait… Could one of the couriers be here? I think I see a trace of blood.
 Someone is waiting for me.
 If we disregard the Kains and Saburovs, one could say my father controls this town as closely as he controls his fat, fat purse. \nSadly, he's content with the current state of affairs, and sees no reason for things to change. His complacency will doom us all. \nThings are already in motion… but let us speak of something else.
 All right.
 You're right, though. The current power balance should be challenged. I'm saying this as a son of the Kin.
 Sticky
 Murky
 Lit a candle. Stupid idea, but it's the best I got.
 Found two candles.
 The door locked behind us. The urban legend was right! \n\nFollowing its logic, I need to inspect the house and light up all candles I can find. Or wait until dawn.
 Found three candles.
 Found four candles.
 Found five candles. Must be only one left.
 "Urmaan, urmaan, urmaan." Am I singing it right?
 Wait… I've seen you in the Stillwater.
 I'll become a new Mistress. Have you figured it out?
 What sort of Mistress will you be?
 I've thought a lot about one line: "And the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." It enthralled me. I wondered how a gate could <i>prevail</i> against anyone. It's just a gate, standing there! Only, I suppose it's not just a gate. And it doesn't just <i>stand.</i> It does something to you.\nI think I'm beginning to see, now.
 You think you've found the gate to hell?
 You are cruel, Kindred. You ought to have killed me.
 I have forgiven you. I mean it. <i>He</i> would, too.
 I'll be the Mistress of the Dead.
 What does that mean, Grace?
 Beautiful, isn't it? Like a real home.
 It is beautiful.
 Listen… Where did they come from?
 Who?
 I never thought I'd end up here… No matter how hard I tried to get inside, I couldn't. Admittedly, I was pretty scared of this place…
 I'd never been here, either… Until recently.
 At first, I thought the steppe couldn't reach this quarter. The Upper Town, the Stone Yard… never welcomed the steppe. It was tough for them here. Too high. Lads used to say Worms are best suited to the soil, but this place is all stone and sky.
 It was the Kains' territory. A different town. Ours, but different.
 I'll be the Mistress of Bulls.
 How about "Mistress of the Kin," instead?
 She yuunde ereebshe? We don't need you. Leave.
 What are you afraid of?
 The world is returning to life. What does it mean for me?
 There's no reason for us to stay in the den below the Factory.
 Can I choose a room for myself?
 I think I know which one you'll take…
 Be my guest. There's plenty of room for everyone.
 No. I'll do that myself.
 Where did you get this lantern, Murky?
 And yet it's just a train car.
 I always wanted to live in a van. Live <i>and</i> travel. Looking at live pictures.
 You can't live somewhere and travel at the same time.
 Found it. The Nutshell went empty, so no one needs it anymore, not over there. So it'll live here, with me.
 Empty, huh…
 Sounds nice.
 Don't just stand there! Choose yourself a corner. This is your new home now.\nYou're not planning to go back to that icky cellar of yours, are you? You've done all you can there. No reason to go back. Nuh huh.
 This place is a bit tight for the two of us…
 Good idea. You'll keep it company.
 How is it icky? It's not icky.
 I'll come back… later. All right?
 Well… let's live here anyway? Please? I've set it all up for us, see? It's pretty. And warm. And pretty.\nAnd the train car <i>will</i> travel one day. And we'll go to the sea together. Please… Stay?
 Fine. Let's live here.
 No. But I will drop by. And we will travel to the sea, one day.
 I'll find a new house for us, big and spacious. Lots of vacant houses around here, now…
 Not sure. But we'll live.
 Any suggestions?
 Will you teach me?
 I guess I'll have to teach someone, if I want to leave this place in ten years or so.
 No. I'd rather someone taught <i>me…</i>
 It depends on your progress.
 Well… first we'll need to settle down, of course. Fix up the household. And then… okay, I made up my mind. I'll be your student.
 What?
 I thought you were already a learned specialist.
 Leave? Where the hell are you planning to go?
 I'm kidding. Where would I go? I'm bound to this town now.
 Elsewhere.
 To the sea, of course. Merchant navy. Any ship would welcome a good doctor.
 You… you can't abandon us now. We need to fix the Town, right? It's on its last legs… It won't survive without you.
 That's where you're wrong, kid. It <i>will</i> survive. That was the whole point. Perhaps it won't ever die.
 Don't shift responsibility. The Town needs <i>you</i> kids, not me. You're the ones who will restore it. That's why Father protected you.
 If it doesn't survive, it wasn't that great in the first place. Good riddance.
 The bulls!
 I don't know.
 So you can see them, too?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Voronika
 Aysa
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sewing Box
 
 
 
 Sewing Box
 Smells of home. Useful for intricate sewing and mending.
 Gravel once knitted a sweater for me. I asked her why it was blue. She told me that blue is the color of morons, and never made me another.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Repellent Cloak
 It's just a piece of canvas, so it can either be worn or used for sewing.
 It's not pretty, but it protects against infection during contact.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from blood.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 
 
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from blood.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 
 Helps lower a patient's pain. If taken before sleep, improves health. Made from blood.
 A mixture of herbs and human organs is called "dead broth." It is believed to absorb death and feebleness, invigorating whoever takes it.\n\nMy handcrafted painkillers have a hidden property: they divert the plague's gaze. If I see the world going dark due to infection, taking one will relieve the effect.
 
 
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Layers is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Layers is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 A tincture reveals some symptoms of the disease, showing which of the three Layers is damaged. But if a patient is administered too many tinctures, the pain can kill them.
 A body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 A body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 A body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 
 
 Among the Layers of the body, Blood is often mentioned; at other times, Flesh; but rarely both as two separate Layers. Blood <i>is</i> flesh. "We are of the same blood, you and I." "You are flesh of our flesh."
 
 Infected Blood
 Can be used like any other infected organ.
 Among the Layers of the body, Blood is often mentioned; at other times, Flesh; but rarely both as two separate Layers. Blood <i>is</i> flesh. "We are of the same blood, you and I." "You are flesh of our flesh."
 
 Infected Kidney
 A sick human kidney.
 "Emshen" means "a doctor," or someone who knows the Lines. "Erdem" means "a wise man," who doesn't know them. Speaking in more modern terms, "erdem" would refer to a scientist.
 
 Infected Kidney
 A sick human kidney.
 "Emshen" means "a doctor," or someone who knows the Lines. "Erdem" means "a wise man," who doesn't know them. Speaking in more modern terms, "erdem" would refer to a scientist.
 
 Infected Liver
 A sick human liver.
 A body is not to be cut open. It's only allowed for menkhu—wise men who know where a body <i>wants</i> to give—and butchers, who accept sin. The word for butcher, "yargachin," also means "surgeon."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 A surgeon's tool of stellar quality. Good at murder, too.
 A tool for a surgeon. A tool for a menkhu. A tool for a bandit. A tool for a ripper. A tool for me.\n\nThis tool was made specifically for surgeons, so it's perfect for autopsies.
 
 Menkhu's Finger
 Trace it along flesh, pry it open. To kill, to cure—is there any difference?
 A tool for a surgeon. A tool for a menkhu. A tool for a bandit. A tool for a ripper. A tool for me.\n\nThis is a ritual scalpel that only the menkhu can touch. If a layman were to try it, it is said the scalpel will turn against their own flesh. But in capable hands, this is the best scalpel available.
 
 Toolkit
 Used to to make complicated repairs.
 According to Stakh, no self-respecting person would use such a kit; any decent master gathers their own collection of gears and scrap, instead of relying on premade solutions.\n\nYet another thing we all do wrong, according to Stakh.
 
 Shotgun
 Slow and imprecise, but devastating at close range.
 A weapon for bandits and hunters, unused by the Army. Grief used to have one. Man sure loves his hunts.
 
 
 Home Key
 I could draw its pattern with my eyes closed.
 Bad Grief would climb in through the window. Stakh, he preferred to stay outside. Only Lara would knock on the door—and so politely, too.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 "Fingernail"
 Doesn't look like a real fingernail at all. This is the first thing out of three.
 This system isn't symmetrical. It's not just "Nerves, Bones, Skin." Or "Nerves, Bones, Flesh." Or "Spirit, Hair, Blood." Any triad is correct.\n\nTruth is not a set point, but an intersection and confluence of many small truths. Knowing this, I can match and connect anything.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Candle
 The wax is warm, like living flesh. This is the last of the three things.
 This system isn't symmetrical. It's not just "Nerves, Bones, Skin." Or "Nerves, Bones, Flesh." Or "Spirit, Hair, Blood." Any triad is correct.\n\nTruth is not a set point, but an intersection and confluence of many small truths. Knowing this, I can match and connect anything.
 
 Spindle
 The thread is thin, like nerves. This is the second thing out of three.
 
 This system isn't symmetrical. It's not just "Nerves, Bones, Skin." Or "Nerves, Bones, Flesh." Or "Spirit, Hair, Blood." Any triad is correct.\n\nTruth is not a set point, but an intersection and confluence of many small truths. Knowing this, I can match and connect anything.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Infection Map
 Reveals the status of each district. Made and updated daily by the Soul-and-a-Halves.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Shekhen
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 They're kinda hard to miss! What, are they not real? Like a… hallucination?
 Doesn't seem so.
 What <i>are</i> they, anyway?
 Aurochs. The bulls of steppe legends.
 I hope.
 Bos Turokh… That's what they call the bull that created the world. I thought he was unique. One of a kind.
 We have the map of the infected districts. And we'll trade it to you for fat loot.
 I'd rather trade it for a spanking.
 You imps!
 If you have a deathwish, fine. But you're spreading the infection too! How many times do I have to tell you!
 You forced me into this.
 I know, I know… We use indulgences now. Here.
 I'm not the one ripping people off…
 Profiteers? Like they'll care about stamped pieces of paper.
 They'll have to give <i>some</i> degree of shit. It'll slow them down.\nWhat's there to mull over? Better to bend the neck than bruise the forehead. If you've got no coupons, don't let the door hit you.
 I'll be back, all right? Just need a breath of air first. The air's lovely these days.
 Yeah, yeah. Just bring more coupons and less idle chatter.
 We'll see how it goes.
 So where would I produce these? Pull them out of a hat?
 
 Be khara, you've done everything right, khybyyn, dear son… Knit together the Town that your father unraveled.\nThe Kin came to power again, threw the Town off its back, left it for Earth to devour. Mother Boddho triumphs, Suok had her harvest. Sated, she now slumbers for a long time…
 In the end, it turned out the way you wanted it, huh, Sahba?
 I want to protect you, little rebels...
 
 From the steppe, apparently. Where else?
 The Earth brought them to life, kid. That's the kind of earth we walk on.
 No idea, kid. I'm as bemused as you are.
 All the streets are like… those old tales of yours. Like that book, "Baur Meges." Is this it? Did the steppe flood us all?
 That's the name. "Baur Meges." A tale of the world's creation. I had no idea you read those kinds of books.
 Perhaps… So Sahba's wish did come true. Or was it her plan?
 Are you scared?
 Scared? Are you nuts? When will I ever see anything like this again?
 Yeah? Well, I am.
 What will become of… everything, now? Huh? Come on, tell me! Hey!
 I don't know. Let's walk around… and witness what we've done.
 Never again. That much is true.
 This is what I wanted, you know. To preserve things almost extinct. Things that would otherwise be ground to dust by time, because tomorrow had no place for them.
 So you don't want our map, huh?
 I'll manage without it.
 I want you alive.
 You're so brave now. But one day you'll walk into a district unprotected and bam! Infection in your face!\nOr someone will get infected because they've got plague at their doorstep, and you won't even know. And then what?
 And then nothing. I'll figure something out.
 Such is fate, then.
 I'm not so easily infected. Unlike you, mutts.
 Crystal clear. Thanks, mom.\nWe could find pills ourselves, we're not helpless, but sure. And if you're so kind, how about bringing other useful stuff too? In exchange, we'll make sure the map is top notch.
 A bargain, huh?
 You're welcome to all I have, troglodytes.
 So how do you like it?
 This is no place for children. It's antithetical to your world. Kids and beasts… inhabit the opposing ends of the vale of life.
 "The veil of life"? I've only heard the veil of death…
 "Vale." As in "valley."
 Vale of life, veil of death, wails of fate…
 Yeah, it's an odd idiom. I don't know what it means, either. Read it somewhere.
 Thought it was just a factory building. Or storage, maybe. Cold. Hooks, chains, meat smells…
 Those things you describe are in hell. We'll see them, in due time.
 Well, it does smell of meat… Blood, at least.
 Been there already. I just thought maybe there were other places.
 It <i>is</i> a factory building.
 And what are those sounds? Is there a beast howling? Or just the wind?
 It's the Earth turning about in her slumber. This place is closest to her.
 There's this pit here… Hell's gate. The howling comes from there.
 Those are the spirits of ancient bulls saying hello. Allow me to translate: "What are these <i>humans</i> doing here? Especially that small one?"
 Ugh. I was asking seriously!
 That was a serious answer.
 Are you still surprised by anything?
 Everything is alive now, kid. So it expresses itself the best it can.
 You've all become so jumpy lately…
 Feels so nice to be a welcome customer. Warms my heart.
 Just don't call the odonghs "worms" to their face. It offends them.
 What face? They <i>are</i> worms. Aren't they? Born of the Earth… Eating Earth, hearing Earth. Earthworms.
 So what? Would you like it if I called you Freckleface all the time?
 Not exactly. But they are connected to the Earth.
 Is it true that those guys and the Herb Brides have their own language? And their own rites, too? And they marry?
 I don't know. I've never seen it.
 Bullshit. Don't parrot nonsense.
 It's true, but be quiet. It's not nice to talk about it out loud.
 You're right. It's strange.
 Why are they here? Why are they all sitting by the Crucible, looking at the Cathedral? What do they care? Did they come to pray?
 Well… times change.
 Pray to what? Time flows differently now. Can you feel it?
 They do have faces. Do I need to teach you some respect, kid? Are they not people to you?
 Go over and ask them.
 Like hell… You ask them.
 I think we'd better stay quiet.
 What is there to ask? It's all obvious.
 The Kains said the Cathedral changes time itself. That's why they made it. But who would believe that…?
 Look around. Don't you find it believable?
 Fair enough.
 Anyway, kid. I clearly see what I've done now. I guess it's for the best.
 That was a nice stroll. Go home and wait for me, all right?
 They're big talkers.
 What <i>have</i> you done?
 Saved all the things that surround us now. They were supposed to be ground down by time, to vanish. But now, they persevere.
 So that's what the doctor's oath was all about. Preserving life. I preserved all living things.
 Even the sand pest?
 Yes, kid. Even the sand pest.
 <i>All</i> things.
 Well… I made life interesting. It goes on, still as terrible and strange as before. People will have to find new roles in this ecosystem.
 What does it all mean… for us all?
 Do you remember me?
 I think I do… You belonged to our house, didn't you? Oh, no, pardon me… You were a courier. Right? You brought in deliveries? …Maybe not. I'm sorry. \nBut your face does seem familiar…
 I'm a doctor. Artemy Burakh.
 No.\nWill you come with us? The path ahead is long and hard. The more go, the better our chances.
 No. I… have a different path.
 I'll catch up with you… later.
 Artemy Burakh? No, sorry. I don't remember the name.
 You will.
 
 
 [I don't have much experience with gunshot wounds. Common sense says I can't get the bullet out safely in these conditions... but I know the Lines. Or, at least, I think I do.]
 Hey, you there! Grab him, and get ready to hold him down if he struggles.
 The resemblance is striking.
 Who the fuck are you?
 Go ahead, if you're not afraid.
 You are a man of action. People respect you. The say you have golden hands.
 My hands are completely ordinary.
 Don't stand in my way. Let me through.
 It's a marsh. Just walk around me.
 Don't go.
 You're welcome. No one will stop you.
 Perhaps there I can build whatever I failed to build here. At least I won't have to stand knee-deep in the mud.
 Did you not build enough?
 It's not mud. It's earth.
 You have such a good, honest face.
 Stay with me.
 If only the personality matched...
 Where?
 In the Town.
 Here. Things will be different now.
 In the past.
 …You have such a good, honest face.
 I know.
 I'm so sorry.
 So beautiful… Look at the moon.
 Yes… It's beautiful.
 Yes… It's beautiful. Please don't leave?
 It'll be better there.
 No, it won't.
 Fine. Go if you want to.
 Some say it'll be very hot. Others, freezing cold. But I don't think it has a temperature at all.
 What?
 Well… it doesn't sound so bad.
 The ahead.
 You can still stop all this, you know. If you only tried…
 Fine.
 Hey… What does it all mean? For me, personally? You have to know.
 Do you recognize me?
 Of course I recognize you.
 I knew it! I knew you wouldn't forget me—not you!
 You're Matvei Shiroky. Huh… We haven't seen each other for what, four years now? You've changed a lot… Barely recognizable.
 No… Please, not a word more.
 You're my friend.
 Whew… For a moment there, I thought… You had a bizarre look. Sorry for doubting you.
 What it all entails…
 Your eyes are so… hollow. Do you recognize me?
 Where are you all going?
 No, I don't. Who are you?
 Artemy Burakh. I… used to be a doctor here. For a bit.
 Are you coming with us?
 No.
 Yes, I am. You go ahead… I'll catch up later.
 East.
 Why?
 It's better there.
 Don't go…
 Doesn't ring a bell.
 Please try to remember.
 No. Shaking the hands of strangers is a terrible idea these days.
 No.
 You have a firm handshake. Unexpected.
 You're a brave woman. Few people have the courage to touch others these days.
 I suppose.\nI'm Aysa Klyonina. A friend of Yulia Lyuricheva. She needs you.
 I see… You two must belong to the same circle of unbreakable women. Are you a mathematician, too?
 Let's shake, then. Aren't you afraid to catch the plague?
 A friend of who?
 No. I'm an engineer. But I help her with calculations.
 Wow…
 I respect that.
 She needs to talk to you. She wants to help you avoid a trap.
 What trap?
 Your voice… It's like I hear iron clanking.
 A sturdy one. Are you coming?
 Where?
 Traps all around… Fate again? Some inevitable evil?
 Possible. Are you coming?
 Where?
 No.
 No.
 A library in the Chine. That's where we live and work.
 Oh… You mean the Trammel? I've heard of it.
 I know the place. Go. Let them know I'm coming.
 It doesn't matter… I'm no one now.
 That's not where east is. Then again… no matter.
 It's not.
 True. Any place is better for humans now… than this.
 I see.
 Do you remember me?
 Where are you going? There's nothing there.
 Ahead.
 Just ahead?
 I don't know. I only know I did this. It's all my fault.
 As if there was any other direction to go. Are you suggesting I return to my childhood?
 Yes. What's wrong with childhood?
 It's not the river of life. It's the steppe. Earth. You can walk it in any direction.
 I'm going back.
 How did this happen? What's wrong with you all? Have you gone insane?
 Where are you all going?
 Over there. Towards the lights.
 There are no lights! Only darkness.
 Towards death. Towards the steppe. It takes a <i>train</i> three days to cross it!
 Hey… do you remember who I am?
 …But I don't. Perhaps <i>you</i> can tell <i>me</i> what it all means?
 Yes. Of course we're friends.
 Are you with us?
 Yes. I'll always be with you.
 Yes. Things have changed.
 …Farewell.
 No. I'm going home.
 I'm with you. Yes. Let's go.
 Depends on who you are.
 As if you didn't know.
 You tell me. I mean it, tell me! Who am I to you?
 Hey… I don't know what to do. I'm at a loss.
 You're a disgrace, oynon.
 Who are you?
 Artemy Burakh.
 True.
 No. I don't think the words to describe her exist in any human language. Care? Protection? Concern? Warmth? Regard? Tenderness? Love? This is stupid. And wrong. Wrong.\nPersonally, I've never been too close to her, you know. I guess you could even say I was the only person who did not love her. But it can't be denied that she was the safeguard of this town. She held it together.
 I know.
 I hardly remember her.
 …But now it holds on its own.
 I never loved my mother. But some things she taught me well, particularly that <i>care</i> is a very smart behavioral strategy. Respect and dignity are the concrete that will hold our new economic foundation together.
 What's your plan, then?
 I'll start with simple things. An eight-hour workday. Forbidding child labor. Insurance. Benefits for disabled workers. Better pay.
 Is that it?
 I can't believe my ears.
 Is that not enough?
 Oh, I was being sarcastic. I doubt you'll achieve even a third of that.
 In your place, I'd be more concerned about the commercial landscape.
 I know. I've thought about that, too.\nListen, Burakh. Would you like to become my assistant? I'll need people to implement my ideas. Especially people like you—people from the Kin. What do you say?
 No, Vlad. I'm a doctor, not a manager. My job is different.
 Deal. I'll help you.
 I don't believe you, Vlad. That sounds like a utopia. It'll never work out.
 
 
 
 Funeral Attendant
 
 Are you… a courier? With inquisitor's papers?
 I'm a new actor. Your successor, so to speak. A continuation of you.
 A new actor is only hired when the old one's dead. Or has this rule changed?
 No. I'm not a courier, I'm Artemy. Though I have seen the guy. Almost got him.
 "Artemy"? What the hell?
 I don't need successors. I'll manage on my own.
 It's all very confusing now. The director washed his hands of this whole business, said we're on our own. No script at all. \nBut I got paid in advance, so here I am. Doing the work I'm supposed to do.
 What are your skills?
 I embarked on your path in advance to make sure the thread doesn't snap. I walked in your footsteps. I've been to the river, spoken with the Changeling, seen the soldiers in the fog. What have you done to them, by the way? Did you shoot, or run?\nAnyway… I don't hinder you at all. But I <i>have</i> made a new connection. You love connections, don't you?
 I do. But I prefer to make them myself.
 What kind of connection?
 You and I are connected. Both alive. Both playing the same person simultaneously. That means we've defeated it. What's so bad about that?
 Playing? Are you kidding? I'm the real thing. The actual person. The one and only.
 Defeated what? You hardly look like a conqueror.
 Like I said, I'm your successor. If you die, I'll continue in your place. Seriously, I'm starting to think I understand the director's vision better than you do.
 Where's the courier? Were you after him?
 Hell if I know. He wanted to live, so he ran. Understandable, really.
 Couldn't even do that right, Artemy Burakh?
 Tell me your name.
 I couldn't finish him off. My arms are weak. You never got the hang of this whole fighting thing. I have to pay for that, since I'm your successor.\nNo hard feelings, though. I guess doctors don't really need that skill. But if you were a better fighter, the courier wouldn't be on the run now…
 You're talking like I'm not still here. <i>And</i> you're bad at it!
 I am Isidor Gasar. I follow in Artemy Burakh's footsteps, trying my best to study him. That's all I want. So, can we go our separate ways?
 No. This world isn't big enough for us both.
 Andrey Stamatin
 We're leaving.
 Why?
 What, across the steppe? On foot?
 I have no place here anymore.
 But why?
 It's not true!
 What else could I do?
 Anything… Why leave?
 Just… live. We'll find a way. It won't be so hard.
 This town is no longer mine. No longer human. No longer rational. It doesn't… accept the likes of me anymore.
 But why leave? Why leave <i>like this?</i>
 But it does! It accepts all kinds of people…
 Yes.
 I don't understand…
 Why?
 I didn't really have a choice.
 Would living in this new world strain your common sense and judgment? Is that it?
 Are you scared the sand pest will come back? It will! But it's no longer a threat to us!
 The bulls… Is that it? They scare me too. They came back… but will go, eventually. And, well, aren't they beautiful? The past resurrected! Who could imagine…
 No. You don't understand.
 Then what is it all about? Yes, the weird, magic, inexplicable beings have returned to life… but wouldn't it be a shame to lose them? Have you no pity?
 You know, humans… are all about <i>warmth.</i> All that happened is just a consequence of that. Warmth and love… Although, I'm not a fan of the word. But… do I make any sense?
 No.
 So this is it? There, ahead of you… lies death.
 I'm just bad at putting it all into words. I understand, but… Look, what happened here is the greatest victory of Life in history!
 Yes.
 But why do you have to go then?
 Because I must. Simple as that.
 Well… I can't stop you.
 I… I had to do it. I'm sorry.
 I've nothing to blame myself for.
 The hell you want?
 I'm here to speak to Grief.
 Get out of this warehouse. I'm asking nicely. Trust me, I'm a doctor.
 We've met, all right.
 Will you stop slumpin'? You look like a question mark, not a person.
 I locked up the warehouse, Grief. And bashed a number of heads in.
 There was this story of a besieged town. People were starvin' there. One of them says, "That's it, I'm seein' angels."\nAn' the other replies, "Can we eat them?"
 Never heard that one.
 
 
 Grief's moved to the Cathedral? Now that's news.
 
 No one lives here anymore.
 Bad Grief is not around anymore. A man named Barley took his place.
 
 A kid made a gift for his father. Two weeks of careful work. He kept thinking how happy Father would be when he opened it… He ran into the room, stumbled, but didn't drop the box! He held it out to Father…\nThen Father pulled a razor from behind his back and cut the kid's face.
 What?
 New work awaits me at the hospital. If the place can be called that…
 New work is awaiting at the hospital.
 You have a wild imagination.
 Here's another famous one. During the previous war, an officer came to a mother with two children in a camp. "Choose which one we kill, the son or the daughter," he said. "If you refuse, we'll shoot both."\nThe mother gave them the daughter. They shot her.
 Why are you telling me this?
 Oh, and listen to this one…
 Enough!
 Go on.
 That's the inquisition. I am an inquisitor's daughter. They're craftsmen, the inquisitors… <i>crafting people.</i> That's what they call their work process. "Crafting people."\nTomorrow, they'll be here. What do we do?
 What do you want?
 I think treachery is the worst sin. Don't you agree? Betraying a warm, living person who trusts you.\nHere's the story: Find a gullible person. An old one. Old people are helpless, you know. Make them follow you. And then… See where I'm going with this? That's what the inquisition does to people.
 So what?
 Don't touch old people. And don't touch <i>me</i> with your words!
 You're delirious.
 Nothing. I just want to look him in the eye. You—never approach them, never touch them. They'll make <i>you</i> the villain. Do you get it?
 I'm not that bad.
 Well… I'm far from heroic, anyway.
 I betrayed my father… I doubt you can surprise me anymore, girl.
 Even if evacuation were an option, I wouldn't recommend it. You wouldn't leave, anyway.\nDo you smoke, Burakh?
 From time to time.
 No.
 I do now… Hand it over.
 The inquisition will target the doctors for certain. I know their methods.\nI mean… sure, they always improvise. Can't be predicted, really. But common sense suggests that you, the medics, will become their pawns.
 What pawns? Why the inquisitors? I have work to do!
 How do you know?
 I worked for the inquisition a bit, right before I came here. Calculated certain… predictive models. The details are of no importance.
 Rubin's not home.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Right… Everyone works for the government. Always. Except for Father and I.
 Burakh, this is serious. Do you even understand what kind of institution the inquisition is?
 Not really. Tell me.
 I know the rumors. They're arbiters, annihilators, geniuses, and so on…
 I've heard of them.
 I thought they did their own calculations. Was I mistaken?
 An organization of geniuses. I believe the Inquisitorial Corps is nineteen strong. Or was it eighteen…? No, nineteen, unless Orff resigned.\nThey're tasked with solving the unsolvable.
 Every child knows that.
 …Like this outbreak of ours. I get it.
 No laws, no ethics bind the inquisitors. They are human missiles, caring only of the mission—nothing stands between them and the mission.
 What does this mean for me?
 They'll take you, Daniil, and Clara, and they'll trade you, turn you into tokens. I'm not sure you can really avoid it.\nUnless you flee? But there's no way out. I suppose you're doomed…
 So why did you call for me?
 I just… I think you should know.\nI'm a logistics expert and a prognostician… and I can tell you some things do depend on your actions. Even if it seems like you're doomed and nothing can be changed, it's not true. A warning can—and will—change your course of action, as well as the outcome.
 I see.
 I don't give a shit. Let any government scum come. I have work to do.
 Let them. I'd like to see them try.
 You're an intelligent woman, Yulia. I'd love to learn from you.
 I don't care. Let's not waste any more time on this, all right?
 
 
 See this girl, Burakh? She says the inquisition will arrive tomorrow.
 What? Inquisition…? As if we didn't have enough hell here already…
 She's not a local. Funny… I didn't even think how she got here. It's not like she has wings!\nThen again, not every road in the world is straightforward and linear. Let us spare the girl torturous questions, she's confused enough as it is.
 And she came <i>to you</i> because every road in the Town leads to your doorstep. That's how you designed them. Do I have that right?
 Curious…
 You have incredible eyes... Who are you?
 Twenty minutes have passed.
 More than half an hour has passed.
 The hour has passed. No one came. So… what do I do now?
 You're scared, aren't you? I see it in your eyes.
 Me too.
 Do you know what the inquisition is?
 A church investigation.
 I've heard about it.
 
 
 
 What the hell are you talking about, Burakh? What church? This isn't funny!
 Are you scared?
 I mean, this whole situation falls in their department. There's an outbreak. We're all dying. What else is there to do?
 I carry this cross willingly. I found myself in your damn town by accident. When hell broke loose… I tried. I tried to fight this wretched plague! I took responsibility, I did everything I should have. Do you understand?
 Arrogant as always, oynon. You're not the only person responsible.
 You've done a lot.
 The Inquisitor will take the one who bends reality. They'll twist them, break them. The person responsible won't even understand how they decided to put a bullet in their own head. That's their method.\nDo you consider yourself free, Burakh?
 Yes.
 No.
 Any choice is right, so long as it's willed.
 I don't know where this girl came from, but their inquisition is up next. Our current situation is exactly the kind they're tailored to solve.\nHave you ever considered angels, Burakh? How do you imagine them?
 I don't imagine them. They don't exist.
 Chubby cherubs with wings and golden curls. Why?
 Why even ask? You don't believe in God, oynon.
 An angel is a nightmare. Their purpose is to instill primal, oppressive horror.\nI think if angels existed, they'd resemble a divine pillar of light—from the heavens to the earth. Devoid of anything remotely human.
 But inquisitors are people.
 Get a hold of yourself, oynon.
 …You're drunk, aren't you?
 Where's the Inquisitor? Has she been here?
 No.
 Listen, I…
 You do understand she has authority over you, right?
 Weird…
 We're not too fond of inquisitors. If she ran into Longin's people, she's probably dead.
 And where's General Block?
 How about a drink, buddy? A drink of water… or something stiffer, if you aren't cheap as hell?
 I got nothing.
 Was there a fight here? Who fought?
 We fought ourselves. It's our boys against our boys now. Don't ask stupid questions.
 Any survivors?
 The fighting moved toward the Factory. And ended there, I guess.
 Don't worry, soldier. You'll survive. Maybe.
 Is that sand pox really… transmitted by thought? Heard about that?
 It's not a pox.
 Got a smoke?
 No.
 Here's some water.
 Say, did a civilian come through here? With papers for the general?
 For the general? Maybe. The general's in the Town—look for him there.
 Where exactly?
 Just wash your hands, and only drink water that's been boiled.
 It is. So think less. That'll protect you.
 …
 Anything else?
 Where's General Block?
 …Perhaps she didn't try to meet him in person after all? Has a courier been here?
 He went out to restore order. Longin's people had three outposts in the Town, so he could be at any one of them.\nInquisitorial couriers have been here. They went after the general.
 Looking for Block? Did they split up?
 Couriers? With the Inquisitor's papers?
 And who might you be?
 Name's Barley. I'm in charge now.
 You're on Grief's throne…
 He's busy kneeling at the Cathedral. Ran off to rat us out, the slippery bastard. I own this place now, so talk to me or walk. Don't care which.
 To the Cathedral? He couldn't have.
 Don't worry, pal—we can still deal. I've got bullets and blades for anyone who can pay. Cash up front, of course.
 Got many customers these days?
 Why did he run away?
 Lots. So don't go pissing me off.
 I've got bigger fish to fry…
 Fine.
 That's unfortunate.
 Any guns in stock?
 So what, you want a treat an' a pat on the head? Hope you didn't strain a muscle bashin' theirs.
 That's fine, I'm used to it.
 …You're welcome.
 Did… did my salvation come at the cost of you gettin' your hands bloody? Dirty business…\nYou know what… here. Have this gun. Will at least help keep things cleaner next time… maybe.
 Is this... a shotgun? And here I thought you weren't a murderer after all.
 Guess I'm not a villain anymore. My conscience is burnin' like a witch…
 You've never been a villain. A crook, sure. But not a villain.
 There won't be a next time.
 And here I thought you pawned your conscience years ago.
 How are you…?
 ...
 Grief, I… the Warehouse gang has a new leader now.
 One of my lot?
 Yes.
 Not anymore.
 That's all right. My lot can be trusted. And if they're not mine, who cares.
 Wake up! I didn't lock up your warehouse.
 Well, in that case, buy yourself a ticket in the front row! Gonna be a real show, those vultures fightin' over meat, or shivs, or…
 You abandoned them yourself. Stop whining.
 Honestly, as long as I can buy ammo there, I don't care that much who sells it...
 You always gotta have it your way… There's some undeniable freedom inside you.\nRemember my Piecework?
 The guy I extracted a shiv from?
 The guy whose guts I cut out?
 That's the one. I asked a favor of you, an' you had it your way… No lies, sort of. You get it? That's it: inner freedom. Miles above the rest of us.
 That's the only way I know, Grief...
 Here's what I'm thinkin', Cub. God gave you golden hands, so you became a healer. If you had bear paws, you'd be a gravedigger.\nWhy did your old man send you away? 'Cause you're his successor. And naturally talented, to boot. You catch my drift?
 I think so…
 No.
 Point bein', you never had a choice. Your path was tailored for you, with a pretty bow on top.\nBut who's the tailor, Cub?
 Who?
 I don't know...
 I don't know either! Fate?
 What do you think of <i>your</i> fate?
 I used to be a thief, yet they made me a storekeeper. And what a perfect fit I made!\nI got my Warehouse kingdom, and with it, the insides of the Town's great machine. I kept Vlad's riches while havin' all I could dream of. Can't imagine a sweeter life.
 So what in the world are you unhappy about?
 Was I tailored for that life, then? The fit <i>was</i> perfect.
 I guess so.
 If the fit was so perfect, what are you doing here? Go back to the Warehouses.
 I don't want it anymore. I don't want that fate. I want a <i>choice.</i>\nOnly, I'm danglin' from a string, Cub. Just like you. We're bound.
 So what would you have us do? Run away, hoping the strings tear?
 Well, I know I didn't run far. The moment the grip loosened, I stopped—and… well. Here I am, sittin', nice an' quiet…
 To hell with this <i>freedom,</i> then.
 You really ought to stop this.
 
 
 
 
 I don't.
 Already done. Your warehouse is quiet now.
 Whoa... That was fast. Did you expect me to ask?
 I kind of did. You never wanted to mingle with that crowd.
 Nah. I just didn't like how they looked at me.
 Well... Thank you, Cub, for cutting this string. One fewer now. Perhaps one day I'll even be able to move on my own...
 Keep going, pal. I can tell something's brewing inside you.
 You'd better. I can't always be your errand boy.
 
 
 Grief is no longer a leader of bandits. Seems like the silly man's decided to become a monk… Not sure if I should laugh or cry.
 Grief… Where does your free spirit take you? Out of the frying pan, into the fire. She seems to have damaged your mind.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 …Worst of all, the smell. Can you smell it? Gunpowder…
 You've been banished to a corner, I see.
 I can.
 I'm fine with the corner. This corner of the world, anyway. What's so bad about it? Corners are cozy. And I don't need much.\nAt least they still let us work… somewhat.
 "They," who?
 Where did you send Grace, the cemetery girl?
 They who smell of powder.\nI remember you, by the way. You were worried about Grace, right? The cemetery girl?
 Yes. Where is she?
 She's now Peter Stamatin's ward.\nDon't give me that look. Does it seem so unthinkable? So surprising?
 …Unthinkable, to put it mildly! He's a drunk and… who knows what else! Definitely not the nurturing type.
 Yeah… a bit.
 Pochard
 Pochard
 How's she doing here?
 She gave me a brilliant idea.
 Let me guess… to quit the booze?
 Quiet… Quiet…
 How are you doing, kid?
 We're fine.
 Who's "we"? You're alone here.
 You look very pale. Do you have all you need here? Food?
 See that little blade of grass growing through the floor? That's Peter.
 The place is a mess… no wonder there's grass growing here!
 Yes. That was his name.
 I'm his keeper now. He wants me to go to the Tower.
 So <i>that's</i> why you're barely alive. You need to get some good sleep. You hear me?
 Don't. I'll take you in… if we survive all this.
 He's my family now.
 Take care, kid.
 Not at all. He's a living person.
 Meaning?
  
  
 He's real. But I don't know how to care for him! I'm used to singing lullabies, but I don't know what to do with the living! Do they like lullabies?
 Of course. Even adults need them, sometimes.
 You'll have to learn, Grace.
 Peter will teach me. It's warm here. I… I like this place.
 You're a good kid.
 Peter? I'm not sure he's good at teaching communication…
 The crowd has lost their minds… They believe the plague can be purged with fire, along with anyone infected.
 Well… in a way…
 Have you heard, doctor? People have completely lost faith in you. We've taken up the good fight ourselves—with fire.
 What fight?
 Hey, uncle! Let's play firestarters. Take a pebble. If you get a red one, you're sick. Black, and you're a firestarter. We use sticks for bottles.\nGet hit, and you're dead. If you're sick and touch a firestarter, they get infected, too.
 What firestarters?
 Did you come to hand me the papers designating the bombardment target? The justification for a surgical strike, signed by the state inquisitor?
 Yes.
 We're talking about the war.
 The war?
 
 
 
 
 Kayura
 
 Crow
 
 Dove
 
 Prompter
 As you should know, lateness leads to darkness, Burakh. But worry not: I have a lantern here for you.
 Am I late?
 Hey, not fair! You've only got red pebbles there!
 You go ahead. I have enough on my plate already.
 Everyone wants to play as a firestarter! It's boring to be sick.\nFolks say the firestarters are sick, too. The plague doesn't kill them; it whispers to them, tells them to burn folks so they suffer less. It's kind.
 The plague doesn't know kindness.
 You play funny games.
 People are frightened for their lives. If a thug attacks you with a knife, will you turn the other cheek? Sand plague is worse than any knife.
 No. I won't.
 You doctors stand around watching <i>microbes.</i> It's we who suffer. You stash away medicine while we're all on our own…\nPersonally, I'm too scared, but there'll be others. They'll burn the sick. They're beyond salvation, anyway—we remember the First Outbreak. But we'll at least protect ourselves.
 We study microbes to <i>save</i> you assholes.
 It's not about faith. If you crave violence, you'll find any excuse.
 There you are… It's good to have a chance to say my goodbyes. I'm leaving. Remember me fondly, Cub.
 Leaving…? With the Army?
 With the Army.
 To war?
 To war.
 Are you mad?
 Where are you going?
 You're surprised? I've always wanted this. I'm made for the military.\nWhere else would I go? I've done enough here for people to avoid looking at me wherever we meet. Elsewhere, it'll be easier to forget.
 Will you at least tell me what you did?
 Got a death wish?
 Maybe I do.
 You idiot!
 No. The secret's not mine alone. I'd betray someone else's trust.
 So that's your decision… and it's final?
 It is.
 <i>Absolutely</i> final?
 I have something else in mind for you.
 You have something to say on the matter?
 Not really… Except that I do respect your decision. You're a free man—free to do what you think is right. Goodbye, Stakh.
 What if I offered you another life?
 I need an assistant.
 What if you became my student? I'll mold you into a decent doctor in less than three years. Finish what Father started.
 Do you disrespect me <i>that</i> much?
 It's a sign of respect!
 You're just… dear to me, that's all.
 Don't you think this is your duty?
 …You surprised me.
 So what do you say?
 Do you need some time to think?
 You've truly taken his place. Your father's, I mean.
 So that you can take mine.
 I need you, Stakh.
 The Town needs you. I… can't do everything on my own.
 Fine. I agree. Now go; I need to wait for the officer.
 To send him to hell, hopefully.
 See you around, Stakh.
 I know the word. It's from a tale! Or a riddle, maybe…
 What tale?
 "The udurgh has a special mound, his ear sticking from the ground. Just make a wish and grab the mud until your hands are filled with blood."\nIt's about the old village! So I guess the udurgh is there… 
 How do I get there?
 What riddle?
 The old village? But it's been dead for so long… 
 You're not trying hard enough. How about stamping the State Inquisitorial Seal on your forehead? <i>That</i> would look official.
 Don't give me cheek, Burakh. I won't have it. You are to report to me here daily. Any more quips, or are we done?
 No. I'm good for now.
 I understand. Report daily—will do.
 I've got more… but I think I can hold them back for a bit longer. See you around.
 
 
 
 People say Anna went to the river at night to drown mice. Guess she hopes to cure herself.
 Cure herself by drowning mice?
 Where's Aglaya? I mean, the Inquisitor? Like, the commissar?
 She sent three people after the general to deliver orders of some kind. Then she left herself, too—after them, I guess. To our blighted headquarters, where else?
 What orders?
 Just orders, somethin' about the bombardment. It's not like she reports to me. I just keep my eyes on the ball…\nIt's about the Polyhedron, I think. It bothers her. Sometimes it even seems like that's why she came to the Town at all… You know how it is with them. There's always a mask behind a mask.
 Shit, this is dangerous! Headquarters won't be happy to see her.
 …Sit with me, brother.
 Huh?
 I mean it. Come on, sit. They're draggin' you down your path, so don't go. Imagine how shocked they'll be when you don't listen!
 No one drags me. I make my own choices.
 No, Grief. I need to go.
 Don't go. Let them break their fingers… Or are you just a puppet?
 You're a puppet.
 That's it. I've had enough of your puppet talk.
 She went on her own?
 Now isn't the time to get sentimental.
 
 
 Someone's wailing inside.
 He must have done something... awful to anger you this much.
 So there's still a chance, eh? Means he's not dead yet after all.
 I've been to the steppe. I went searching for an aurochs. What's going on in the Warrens? The Termitary, I mean.
 I don't know. But all Kin seem to be there… locked up. Which is good—it saved their lives. Why do you ask?
 …Because you are Isidor's son. His charge now rests on your shoulders. And you… you're still so little… Mother Boddho help us all.
 Better yet, you help me. There must be some sort of unusual blood around here…
 Do you know what an udurgh is?
 My father was murdered.
 An aurochs? But they went extinct <i>years</i> ago! Were you actually looking for one? <i>Why?</i>
 Overseer Tycheek… no. Taya—his daughter. That's who I need. That's who I'll go to the Termitary for.
 There are so few of us left, Artemy, son of Isidor. Do you understand that only a few hundred people in the world know our tongue? That only a few dozen remember our stories? That less than a dozen can interpret them?
 Stop pushing me.
 Taya is there. A girl from Father's list. That's why I'll go.
 I am a broken man—that's who I am. And you are not, Kindred, but tomorrow you will be, too. And then nothing will ever be fixed.
 Tomorrow I'll <i>break?</i> Why the hell would I?
 I've been told you were in the Termitary.
 There's an outbreak in the Town. Did you not know?
 Do not look at this wound, Kindred. Go and do the deed.
 Let me examine you.
 Do you have a home?
 Go.
 Where will I find you later?
 
 
 
 
 
 The steppe is beautiful in fall… and fall is the season of truth. In fall, we keep our promises. Own our deeds… Our crimes. Cleanse our mistakes.\nA good season.
 I know who you are. You're the Foreman of the Abattoir.
 I'm Isidor Burakh's son.
 Wait, Kindred. Look carefully. Not at me—at Earth.\nThe Lines have brought us both to this dead place. I do not like it. So, before you ask anything, tell me: why have you come?
 I'm making a cure for the sand pest. I need blood. Unusual blood…
 Wrong. You will one day accept authority over the Kin, so that they live. This is essential. Nothing is more important. It is the only way for our people to survive.
 Our people are doomed.
 I'm a doctor, not a ruler.
 I'd like to see Fat Vlad's reaction to <i>that</i> idea.
 Tycheek knows not the Lines. He struggles to choose one way or the other. Your father had skill. He knew the Lines far better than me. And so do you. Your heart chooses right. \nTycheek would acknowledge you, would speak to you on behalf of all Khatanghe. I would support you and explain everything to him… but they would not let me inside the Termitary.
 Who?
 Obviously. It's quarantined.
 They shot me with a rifle. The bullet lodged itself beneath the ribs. Nothing I can do now… Since when do we use weapons? What madmen grabbed knives? How do they intend to live here, after that?\nI don't understand. What can I do? I can overpower six people with my hands alone. But I can't shoot.
 Let me see your wound. I'm a surgeon.
 What would you have me do?
 You haven't answered my questions.
 The Kin will. Your father was with them on the eve of his… death.\nDo as I ask of you.
 What?
 Say it out loud. You know the answers, but you won't tell me. Is that how it is? I don't like it.
 Try to get inside the Termitary—you'll find a way. Seek out overseer Tycheek. We need to wield power over the Kin, to find an agreement.\nSeveral thousand people are in the Termitary. Olgimsky's Town, the Town of Humans, is dead. We will enter the Warren. Then we will again emerge, and take what is ours. Do you understand?
 Aspity—Sahba—she wanted the same.
 No. I don't want this.
 Isidor would go.
 Don't try to pressure me, Foreman. I don't take kindly to it.
 Fine. I'll go. And then you'll answer my questions.
 What for?
 If the people do not accept you, it's useless. How can you understand us? How can you learn our lifeblood? The knowledge of Earth, of the udurgh, is meaningless when you're alone. When you're confused, unable to share responsibility.\nWe are all responsible. Merge with the Kin. Merge with Earth. Then we'll speak… Kindred.
 I understand… Kindred. I'll find Father's murderer. And we'll seek vengeance together.
 I don't exactly like our people. But I want to understand Father. And finish his business.
 Unless you're dead by then. Since you refuse my help.
 I know.
 Who did it?
 Any trickle of blood seeps from Olonngo. From the Abattoir. Always. Blood means the Abattoir.\nBut no one can get in there now.
 But this blood came from beneath the ground.
 You want to know the truth? Of your father's death? His duty? His path? What it means for you… and for me?\nThen stop acting out, Kindred, and do as you must.
 …What?
 What did you say to me?
 I don't let people talk to me like that.
 Blood medicine, you say? Good.\nWell. I am the Foreman of the Abattoir. My life is blood. I've cut open more bulls than you could ever see in your life. My arms are elbow deep in blood. My legs, knee deep.
 So where does it come from?
 You all lost it while I was gone.
 Where's the commissar? Aglaya Lilich?
 I'll shine a light for you. If you do not believe your eyes, I'll <i>make</i> you see the stage is clear!
 Where's the Inquisitor?
 I thought you'd never ask! Her Cataclysmic Majesty would like the army band to play her tune. She sent three copies of her songbook, on the backs of three couriers, and then moved on ahead to conduct this choir herself.
 Enough with the comedy, where is she?
 You'll find the maestra in the Town Hall. The Town will shake from root to root when mighty trumpets ring the air!
 What concert?
 The Symphony of the Falling Tower!
 …She's destroying the Polyhedron?
 Bravo! Bravo!
 I'll stop this circus.
 Huh…
 What sheet music?
 Who is she, then?
 She never was one.
 You know nothing of her! This cursed town smothered her. Forced a stupid role on her. She got it in her head that she had to be anyone but herself. That's the kind of town we live in…\nShe used to be different. Completely different…
 Earth spoke to her. Most people would find that unbearable.
 What was she like before?
 Well… Earth won't speak to her anymore. Or to anyone else.
 There'll be other Mistresses in the town. Leave them alone. And Katerina… she'll start by bringing the Cathedral back to life.
 How?
 Who do you think you are, expecting me to talk about my wife with you?
 A member of the community who expects to know how you're planning to govern us.
 I'm sorry.
 Oh no…
 You'll see.
 Something feels wrong about it.
 Just tell me she's not religious. Anything's better. Even a second plague.
 …Sometimes I feel like I was born to be a widower.
 You never know. You've got your whole life ahead of you.
 You still have the Town.
 Is that so?
 Was he ever? I mean, it's just a title…
 He's a ruler now. <i>The</i> ruler. The Bull Enterprise is destroyed. The Olgimskys are over. The Kains… are no longer on this side of the river. Everyone's scattered, like children after a game ends…\nBut my husband alone would never abandon his duty. His town.
 Didn't take you long to label everyone traitors.
 He really is an honest man.
 The Olgimskys were always the guts: hot, alive, feeding the Town. The Kains were the nerves: spark and potential. People cling to the belly for warmth. They grasp at the nerves to reach beyond themselves. \nBut no one ever dares to touch the bones.
 The bones are your family, I guess?
 Surgeons do.
 Yes. My husband is this town's spine. And now, with that horrible weight lifted from him… he will straighten.
 Sounds uncanny.
 Your husband is a man of honesty and resolve. He'll make a good ruler.
 And our town is no longer a town. Without Alexander, it will run a few minutes more, like a headless chicken, then fall…
 Yes. Your husband was a strong man.
 No. But it will be different.
 Don't you mean "seventy-five"?
 Mother said she'll teach me numbers. Father will do letters. Then they'll let me get back to work. I'll stay at the cemetery and count the dead. Count them, and then write it down.\nThat's fine. If that's what I need to do to go back there, I'll do it.
 "Mother"? "Father"?
 …Did they tell you that from underground? Do you still… talk to them?
 My foster parents. Alexander and Katerina. The governor's family took me in.
 …They couldn't have said that.
 So they adopted you too, now? It never ends…
 Why?
 Katerina's dead.
 Alexander's dead.
 They're both dead.
 So what?
 Oh… I forgot who I'm talking to. So they adopted you?
 Only, I don't want to leave that nice apartment with the pictures. It smells so sweet: paint, twyrine… carraway, for some reason. And there's music in the window.\nBut Katerina says I can't stay there. She says we have to be together.
 She's right, I guess.
 You could run off at night.
 You know, I pressed my ear to the ground today, as I always do… and something has changed. There used to be a murmur, but now it's gone. Do you think it's because there are too many of them now?
 It was… an underground heartbeat. It has stopped.
 You know… it'll be calmer for them now, in this new Earth. I think.
 Can't we just have a normal town, for normal living people?
 Simon was better than me. He did what I never had the courage to do: thrust a knife into his own firstborn. He couldn't bear the infant's scream, but still…\nStill, he succeeded. Simon Kain and Isidor Burakh vaccinated our town against death.
 You mean… You know everything?
 That vaccination cost you the Polyhedron.
 The Polyhedron was a glass bottle. A clepsydra. A compass. A work of exquisite craftsmanship… but merely a tool, like this town. The first of the many steps on this ladder.
 I thought you stored something precious inside that bottle… but whatever.
 My brother and I have been preparing to face a catastrophe like this for many years. We knew that only people whose lives were imbued with meaning and purpose could survive it. People with bowstrings for souls.\n…I never imagined that there'd be so many survivors. Truly, we live in the best of possible worlds.
 …And not a single word for the person who actually saved them.
 But even more are dead.
 Maybe you're right… about the purpose.
 We ascended—one step. A single step, but a crucial one. The mission of House Kain on this side of the river is over.\n…So why does Simon, my dear twin brother, still haunt me in my sleep?
 My dreams are bitter, too.
 It's called "love," Judge.
 Perhaps you'll be at peace on the other side of the river.
 I'm glad we agree on this, Judge.
 I always knew that, deep down, you didn't really love our town. And that one day, you'd abandon it.
 I loved it less than Simon did.
 Love hurts, huh?
 …I know.
 …They were always driven upwards, and that's what became their downfall. Too straightforward an interpretation. We need to follow the magnetic lines—they are the nerves of the earth.\nWe'll make a massive glass podium in the center. Like a lens, you see? And inside it, a compass.
 Drawing a plan for the future?
 There are no more nerves… The Earth is dead. It lost too much blood.
 Blood is only food for the spirit. For as long as we stand on this ground, its gravity exists, driving us down. While we are driven, we live.
 So it's a sentient corpse, now? Better than… just a corpse, I guess.
 A curious way of looking at it.
 We've done too much looking and not enough listening. Yes, that's it! Sight is humanity's primary sense, so it impedes us. Too simple, crude.\nIn our new town across the river, we won't let ourselves rely on sight.
 You mean that… literally?
 You're right. What is essential is invisible to the eye. It's felt, in the bone.
 How primitive of you.
 Look, I'm just happy you're not going to gouge your eyes out.
 Excuse me, then.
 We will not govern our new town. We need to find a way to avoid governing it… so it will govern us. Houses will write edicts. Streets will invent laws. Roofs, sentence criminals. \nDon't give me that look. But do come when our new town is complete. You'll be welcome.
 Sorry. No looks. You're biased against sight, I got it.
 Hm… I guess I'll drop by.
 Good luck.
 I meant the interesting parts of the Town.
 So did I.
 The Oneirotects?
 You're talking about the dingy part of the Town. Dingy and chaotic. Messy. <i>Our</i> town has no place for unnecessary things.
 Says the girl living in the abandoned observatory.
 Anyway, things went wrong with the Cathedral, somehow. It remained unfinished.
 How is it unfinished? It looks finished to me.
 It's empty and silent. Soulless. A week ago, I had a dream. I was walking down its aisle… or rather, falling. I woke up and thought… Ah, it doesn't matter.\nYou know, I think the Kains might take me with them when they leave for the other side. Us standing here together… it just feels right. They know I'm one of them.
 Is that so?
 We'll build a new town across the river! Iridescent, and specular, and transparent… Well, they'll build it. I'll just listen and tell them if they've gone too flat or too sharp. 
 Congratulations on the new job.
 Well… good luck, girl with a soul.
 One stroll around the Crude Sprawl and you'd see just how interesting it can be.
 Dingy, but alive.
 And useless.
 Whatever you say. Your choice.
 I am no human, but a bull. Olonngo is my home. So while the Ford is closed, I will remain here.
 You know what? Go to Father's house. It's vacant—no one will bother you. You can rest there.
 All right. Stay here then.
 …You're offering me your own house?
 Yes.
 Father's house. You two were friends. He'd do that for you, too.
 Truly you sense the Lines, Khatangher… I suppose I should come there once again. To remember… and to endure the pain.
 Come… Kindred.
 Settled, then.
 Well, they're made of bones.
 I'm dying, Ripper. Only a tiny drop remains. Like someone cleaved me in half, and it all spilled out.
 I don't believe you. You aren't the type to be destroyed so easily.
 Were you really the plague, then?
 Hey, are there… two of you?
 There's only one half of me left.
 The better half, I hope?
 I'm not the plague. Do you still not get it? My sister was… and I'm the good one… Was the good one.
 Yeah, sure. Blame it on an evil twin.
 You're an idiot, Ripper! A dull, insufferable idiot. All that talk of rivers of blood… that's not what this story was about at all!\nYou have <i>no idea</i> who's up above us! No idea who you <i>actually</i> killed!
 "Above us"? So who's up there?
 I know all too well.
 Someone you weren't even <i>invited</i> to meet! But they're waiting for me… Poor souls… And now I'll never come…
 That's fine. You'll sit this one out and find a way to get there.
 Well… Maybe one day I'll figure out <i>your</i> side of the story.
 …I'm sorry.
 I wouldn't call it an invitation.
 A powerful performance requires a strong entrance.
 Entrance, pah… I feel like I'll <i>exit</i> that place feet first.
 We'll see.
 I've improvised once or twice already… and yeah. I think I'll pass now.
 Do you know her?
 Aglaya Lilich? As an inquisitor, you mean? I don't know.
 You don't know if you know her or not? What do you mean?
 Can't argue with that.
 You mentioned working for the inquisition.
 I did indeed perform certain services… errands, really. But that doesn't mean I understood them. Doesn't mean the opposite, either.\nYou'll see for yourself soon… and if you don't, you'll sense it. You're the kind to think with your heart.
 Intriguing.
 Hands, not heart. But I'm flattered anyway.
 Look for openings?
 They recruit children?
 You can't be a creator and a critic at the same time. To create greatness, you must ignore the minutiae. Work in wide strokes.\nBut… inquisitors eat into everything, like vinegar, lingering on every detail. They find a blemish, a flaw, then claw at it until you're finished.
 Do you know her?
 Sometimes.
 And you know this inquisitor personally?
 At one degree of separation.
 That doesn't count.
 I see…
 I'm not that easy to claw.
 I'm not sure I agree about creators and critics.
 Why? What does Peter have to do with her?
 
 
 One apostate is dead.
 Two apostates are dead.
 Three apostates are dead. One more will be enough. They'll get the message.
 Thank you. You are free to go.
 Yes, sir.
 …I don't feel free at all. My fate drives me.
 Yes. It's been a rough September.
 Why defeat it?
 Life's more interesting this way.
 Well, maybe…
 You know, fellow traveler? You should talk to my new friend. His name's Bachelor Dankovsky. Really big on the whole "fighting death" thing.
 Oh, I know. I'll get to him right after I've finished with you. He's smarter than you are.
 Every other person is smarter than me here…
 Just be careful around him. He's a fussy sort of person… Delicate.
 Sounds nice, but it doesn't hold up. The common cold can sometimes kill a person.
 A boundary… Good word.
 It <i>is</i> good.
 So… What now?
 I'm stupid. I have no talent. I… should never have even come here.
 Where will you go then?
 To the heart of the Town. The central square. To, I don't know… the Theatre. I don't have much of a choice.
 Don't worry. You'll have a choice there.\nBesides, you've already done all you can. All that's left is… a bit of business to wrap up. Things that concern you alone. And you… who are you? Who cares about you?
 I see.
 It's true. I'm no one.
 You know what? I actually like myself. I've walked my path well these past eleven days. I can respect myself.
 Relax. She won't bite.
 Words, words, words.
 Tenegh…
 Hush, you'll destroy my focus. Scientia potentia est. "Ski-EN-ti-a"…
 Enunciate that "ski" more crisply, maybe?
 I never thought you… rehearsed all that.
 She threw some… sack into the Gullet. I don't know what's inside.\nWe have a custom. To avoid bad fortune, one must drown a mouse. You see, trouble grabs its tail, thinking it has grabbed luck. By the time trouble realizes its mistake, the flow of water drags it away. So she must be drowning mice, even though we don't believe such customs.
 Yeah, you clearly don't.
 We don't have mice around, though. Only jerboas.
 To hell with secrets. But you do have a place in this town.
 Bou khara, bou shagna… Aydahamni khurene. I fear Earth is dying. Mother Boddho sinks into the depths. People begin to fear me. Look through me. Cross the street to hide from me. No one needs me. No one wants me.
 They fear what they don't understand. Who are you, truly?
 I am… Sahba Usp'tae. Flesh of Earth's flesh. Mother Boddho gave you a piece of herself, so that you may have a mother. That was me. Unente, today I return to Earth. Sahba is ubshe… A shabnak tale to frighten children…
 Don't go.
 Be khara, I shall go blind, deaf. I was part of your journey. Yet you left me by the wayside.\nLet that be so, emshen. I changed for you. Mother Boddho spoke to you through me. But if you need not a mother, then she need not speak to you.
 But you can see and hear me just fine, Sahba. What are you talking about?
 <i>I</i> need you.
 Boleesh, boleesh, byy alysh… When a child is alone, calling Mother, calling Father, unable to walk. Can't walk… Unente, all is foreign when you are abandoned.
 Is that child you?
 I'm sorry…
 The Kin needs you. They are yours, now.
 Bou khara, do not watch. Bou shabna, do not listen. Oshysh daa: Go. Please. Bayartay, khybyyn. Khayratay inagni, let your step be warm.
 Very well… khetey.
 I don't believe you! You're human, and you'll remain human. Or become human.
 Bayartay…
 I do! I know you don't believe me, but I need you!
 Your friend valued it. What if Khan gloated over Jester's death?
 Jester cannot die.
 Good for you.
 Those who spend all their time up high, fall really hard in the end. That's how you get your dream dome smashed to bits. Bad idea! In the end, all dreamers walk the same earth, and I'm in charge of this here earth. Dealing in dreams? Nah, not for me.
 You're not the only one in charge.
 Of course. There's also you. I really like you! Just look at your Half! It clearly shows your quality of character.\nSo you're with us now, yes?
 So you accept me into the Soul-and-a-Halves?
 Will <i>you</i> take <i>me</i> into the Kin?
 Why would you want that?
 I'll build warehouses. Just think about it.
 We already have warehouses. Why build more?
 No. But you can hang around.
 And what will you store there?
 I'll have a warehouse full of everything. Every miraculous thing. You know? Rarities and oddities.\nCrucially, those'll be <i>things.</i> Material objects, not ethereal reflections of dreams like Khan's. Things! Get it? Have you ever run your hands over cloth? Smelled walnuts? Seen a piece of carnelian?
 Ambitious and open-minded. I like it.
 Huh… I thought you were a gang leader, but you're more like a poet.
 Some people like their dreams. Keep that in mind. Not everyone will follow you, at least not right away.
 Doghead
 
 I am not human, Kindred. Look at me. I am an animal. Sometimes, too, people take me for a Worm. A halfbreed, between man and bull, they call me.
 Why would I look at you?
 Why would I listen to you?
 
 
 <i>The Shelter smells of gunpowder. Rusty iron. Snowmelt by a brick wall. A whole year.</i>
 
 
 Who in the world is she planning to kill? Lara, you idiot…
 
 
 The Army has split. Fighting among themselves, frightened witless, the heroes. General Block has been arrested.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Lara… I've forgotten about her.
 
 
 The children have tracked a murderer. They said he'll come to "Friday's yard when pigs fly overhead." Guess I'll have to wait a bit.\n\nCould it be <i>the</i> murderer…?
 The children have tracked a murderer, the one who put creepy notes in their stashes.\n\nCould it be <i>the</i> murderer…?
 The children have tracked a murderer, the one who put creepy notes in their stashes.
 
 
 …I was looking for a murderer. He expected a thief. So we've met. What the hell?
 
 
 What the hell was that? Who was that? He had nothing to do with anything. These children…
 
 …I was looking for a murderer. He expected a thief. So we've met.
 <i>A heart held in hands. Can you hear the water splash? Come to us. Please. Please. It's me, Capella.</i>
 
 
 Victoria Olgimskaya's daughter is our new Mistress. Why do children have to take after their parents?
 <i>You haven't come… I'm sorry. I'll try not to see you anymore… if I can. It was me, Capella. Victoria.</i>
 This is a bizarre time that started with the courageous "do as you please" and delved into "this is the only way to go." I'm not sure anything <i>I</i> wanted to say found its way here.
 I see.
 
 
 
 
 
 Who are you?
 I don't know.
 You've lived too soberly as it is.
 I don't want to live anymore, Cub. I just… don't. Life has lost meaning.
 This too will pass. Believe me, Lara.
 Have I?
 You've never been overly sentimental, that's for sure.
 No, I'm sorry. That was stupid of me to say.
 Of course you have. You're clear-headed. Determined.
 What experience?
 The outbreak. All eleven days of it.
 Don't worry. Things will return to normal, eventually…
 What did you expect? People are people.
 Sobering… It should be sobering. Those are the people you wanted to serve. That's what they're like! I mean, what <i>we're</i> like.
 No. It will not. It's all gone now.
 Even so, it's better then death. Even if it's more… exhausting.
 No, it hasn't. We need to rebuild. Make it as it was before, but better.
 Consider it a vaccination. They always hurt, always make you feverish.
 But what were we vaccinated against, Cub?
 I don't know… The past, I guess?
 The earth. So we can keep our feet planted.
 Whatever it was, we needed it to have the right to try something new.
 You know what else I've realized? No one needs me here. I'm useless. Whatever I do, it only makes things worse. It's either stupid, or ridiculous, or fruitless… No one needs me.
 Hey, don't lose heart, sister! Come on, cheer up. Never say that again.
 That's not true. I need you.
 It will pass… Believe me. Come here, come here. Let me hug you.
 Thanks. I could use a hug.
 There. Much better.
 I… I can't raise my hands! Hey! What sort of trickery is this?
 What's wrong? You don't have to hug me if you don't want to…
 It's like… like something won't let me!
 I… I remember now. He said I wouldn't be able to hug anyone. Damn it…
 If you like me so much, perhaps Jester will finally show himself?
 That's up to him.
 "Cats know the fact of the matter…"
 Bobhead
 He's not here.
 You're alive…
 So? Did they execute her?
 Whom?
 Er... the mistress of the house.
 Who?
 What for?
 Who are you?
 What are you doing here?
 I mean… this is a public shelter, isn't it? "Home for the Living"? Means anyone can come in. Like, if you got your house burned, or want to escape quarantine. That's what she said.\nAnd now she's asked someone to replace her.
 Why?
 So, here's the thing. The mistress of the house, she said, "I'm gonna go kill the general. 'Cause the general, he put my dad, Captain Ravel, through a court martial, for insubordinate conduct, and then my dad got sentenced and executed as a traitor and deserter."\nAnd then she said, "Fate sent him to me now. General Block, that is."
 Kill the general? What do you mean, kill the general?
 But <i>who was executed?</i> Tell me, now!
 Just like that. Got herself a gun and went to the headquarters… And to us, she said, "Take my household, and manage it well." So that the whole shelter thing wouldn't end with her, right…\nSo now we're having a look around… Sorry if we disturbed anything.
 The shelter thing… <i>The shelter thing…</i>
 Oh, why do you have to be such an idiot, Gravel!
 What were you thinking? How could you let her <i>go?</i> You morons!
 So she went to the headquarters? The Town Hall? Was it long ago?
 I mean… You won't catch her on time, unkind sir. Half an hour ago or so.
 Half an hour…
 No. No! This is insane!
 Get lost, all of you.
 You idiot… Oh, what an idiot! You got a death wish?
 What have you done…
 They've done him in. Without me.
 I've failed. I've failed…
 You should be thanking heavens you've failed!
 But you wanted to do it yourself, didn't you? Bet you were planning to shout something, too. Make sure he knew what he'd die for. Yes?
 Are you arrested?
 What do you have here? A revolver? Give it to me. Discreetly.
 I couldn't do anything. I came in, waited here. They asked what I wanted. I said I wanted to see the general. And they laughed… said it'd be a long wait.
 Why?
 Yes.
 Why aren't they throwing you out?
 Come on. Let's go from here. All right? It's over, now please… come.
 There's a mutiny. A rebellion. I've overheard.\nOnly, it's not real… They told the soldiers that the general caught the plague, so they're leaving. But he's not sick. They've arrested him. To leave the Town, you see?
 I see full well…
 They don't care. They're no longer the military.
 What makes you think so?
 Really? They look military enough to me.
 Good riddance. Now let's go…
 Only, here's what I think. Longin, the mutineers' leader, was Block's executive officer. His loyal watchdog. Father wrote that he'd go through hell or high water for the general. Meaning…
 What?
 We really need to leave. Now. Please?
 It's not a mutiny. They seized him to make sure he doesn't have to disobey orders.\nThey adore him. General Ashes. A beloved general. They removed him from dirty work to make sure he has an excuse. That he's safe! That's he's not punished when they return!
 Stop shouting! They'll hear… Quiet!
 So let them. Let them leave without a bombardment. But Gravel, dear, please… sweet Gravel. Let's go, you shouldn't be here…
 And that means he'll escape with his whole hide! Safe, with a clean reputation!
 He'll meet his fate sooner or later. Come on, that's enough war for you for today.
 No one will escape this meat grinder whole, Block least likely of all. Neither will you if you keep standing here. How much time do you think they need to notice what you're hiding under your shirt?
 It's all pointless… All pointless.
 To the contrary. Such events follow a particular… line, so to speak.
 Still, hand me that pop gun of yours. And no "buts."
 What happened to your father, anyway? Was that the story you didn't want to tell me when I arrived?
 Yes. And I don't want to tell it now.
 Are you absolutely sure that Uncle Ravel was… by Block?
 Yes. It was written in the orders. We were sent a letter. Court-martialed. Sentenced to death by firing squad for disobeying orders.\nAnything else you'd like to know? If Father truly was innocent? If the sentence was just? If that was the right thing? Go ahead, don't be shy!
 Be quiet!
 How about shooting me now? While you're on fire and everything!
 …I'm sorry.
 What happened to the general?
 
 Like a child? Don't you hate children?
 I'm only joking. I'd rather like some candy, though…
 Should I tuck you in, too?
 Absurd! We never kidnapped anyone. They tagged along of their own accord.\nNo, rather… I'm not from no Caravan. Never was such a thing, sawbones. It's a myth. I just like children. I'm kind and tender like that.
 You like children, you say…
 …And sing me a lullaby.
 Y'know, children <i>are</i> rather ruthless creatures. Cruel, too. I'm starting to doubt my decisions.
 If nothing else, you can act. That was a masterful depiction of a child.
 Conscience is a hell of a thing. Like the gap between trapeze bars, it doesn't forgive.\nSorry, circus joke. You wouldn't get it.
 Always thought of my conscience as a presence rather than a void, myself.
 A drunken mind speaks a sober heart, indeed.
 Yes, sweet pea. Come on, let me hold you.
 Hmm… I must go out. I must see her.
 Whom?
 My tower.
 You won't see it. It's no longer there.
 All right. Go.
 You're a cruel man, Burakh. Can't you see I'm mad? Would it be so difficult to play along for a bit? Then I could believe in a miracle… for a few minutes longer.
 The Kains want to build a new town across the Gorkhon. You should go with them.
 You're a kind man, doctor. She's no longer there. And yet here you are… playing along… as if I'm a child. Tell me… How is she?
 You'll build a new one. The Kains will support you.
 We didn't see eye to eye, the Judge and I. He argued that the Tower was never their family's crowning achievement… merely mine. And I concur. It was my crown. I've hit the ceiling…
 So then you did see eye to eye…
 And so you gave up?
 Yes… We shared the same opinion. Where's the inspiration in that? Consensus is an anchor…\nSay, Burakh. Why do they say miracles have abandoned the steppe?
 Because there won't be any more twyrine to drink.
 It's the price we paid for curbing the outbreak.
 So my glass miracle vanished alongside your steppe miracles… You know, Burakh? Don't say anything. Let it be so.
 Yes, Peter. Your tower vanished along with our miracles.
 There are no miracles, Peter.
 Have you ever lost everything?
 Recently, yes.
 Fine. Have your drink. We'll get back to this tomorrow, when you're sober.
 Don't you see we're having a conversation here?
 I do.
 Stop trying to provoke me. It won't work.
 If anyone is to write about me, I'd like it to be you, Yulia. At least nothing will be overdramatized.
 The work will be, of course, scientific. But the title…\nI'm thinking about throwing the scientific language out the window and giving it an old-fashioned name: <i>On the Connection of Everything.</i> What do you say?
 Well… You're the author. I guess it sounds nice.
 Thank you.\nI think the academic world in the Capital may have a couple questions regarding the subject of my research. Perhaps you'd like to come with me? As an assistant and… well, the subject.
 Like a rat? I'll pass, thanks.
 You're late.
 Well, it's not like I've missed my train…
 What? Did the play start already?
 Who knows…
 I was busy.
 On the contrary, the play is over. And, yet again, it's over because you have failed at your task.
 Shame about that.
 You were late! You didn't make it in time, do you understand? A theatre is all about being <i>on time!</i> To the minute! Being late is unforgivable. One person is late, and everything is ruined.\nYou've let everybody down. Everybody! I don't even know how I'm supposed to go on working with you. It will never come to anything, this way. Anything <i>whatsoever.</i>
 I'm afraid I'm hopeless.
 …I am forced to cancel the rehearsal. You're free to go.
 Actually, I think it's better this way.
 Actually, I wasn't planning on coming here in the first place.
 What's wrong this time?
 No, I haven't.
 I don't know what you want from me.
 What bliss. Free at last!
 Is this another one of your techniques?
 No, I'm done with techniques. I'm letting you go.
 What now?
 I'm not in the habit of lying.
 You've ruined everything for me… Everything. This entire production—the action, the challenge, the pain and peril, the brilliant blasphemy—it was all for the sake of the experiment.\nAnd I told you about it! It was a test! A test of humanity's limits. An exercise in transcending those limits. You failed.
 Failed it how?
 All of… who? This place is always pretty empty.
 Damn… I think I'm starting to understand.
 Did you make a deal? Here on this stage? Did you? Answer me!
 Yes. I did.
 So what if I did? It's not like you ever explain anything!
 I was… having a hard time with all those additional burdens.
 Of course, it was hard! That was the idea behind your ascension! How can anyone be made to feel the heroic torment of Sisyphus if they're given a paper boulder to roll?
 But why? What's the point?
 I thought it was part of the show.
 Maybe… maybe. This production had quite a number of, shall we say, <i>unplanned parts.</i>
 So what now?
 Because… because in this play, death becomes your partner! Understand? Humanity's most immutable, unconquerable limit!\nYou and death are in dialogue, don't you see? So how do we make your triumph convincing? How can you make it feel real? <i>How?</i> I'm asking you—<i>you!</i>
 You tell me!
 And so you lost. Everyone lost, because of that.
 Why?
 I don't know, all right?
 I wasn't exactly playing games, here!
 The moment you die, you come into contact with death. What kind of contact? A moment of valor, or idiocy? No one knows! But it is a brush with death. Thus, a connection—a state of attainment. Understand?\nBut why am I even asking you? I still don't entirely understand this myself!
 Why all the dumb burdens, then?
 I… I wasn't exactly playing games here, either!
 Why are you so upset, pal?
 So you're trying to say… that's how you defeat death? Are you joking?
 Why does life get harder with all these… layers? These repetitions? These continuations, these intersections… They're a goddamn mess!
 I told you, didn't I? It all went right over your head. We needed it for… candidness! For understanding! For the connection, and the attainment! Not to mention the <i>experience.</i> \nAnd here you are. I'm disappointed in you.
 So what happens now?
 Now? Now I'm going to work with someone else, obviously. I'm not interested in you anymore. Not interested in you as a character, you understand? A character. Not a human. You're simply too… dense.
 You'll work with this one, I presume?
 Yes. I need someone who feels more indignation, respect, and reverence toward death than you. Someone… passionate, if you will.\nSo, with your permission, I'll get back to him and we'll continue discussing his part. And my new plans concerning his part.
 Ahh. He's going to put you through a world of hurt.
 Well, then. It's the best choice you could make. Keep working—I won't distract you any further.
 So, a new one… That means the old one existed for a reason, too.
 Yes. Possibly. I think so.
 Where do I get my exit fee?
 Well… Goodbye, then.
 That's regrettable. I am what I am…
 Go through that door—no, not the main entrance; the small one to the right of you. Into the storeroom. \nGet changed there, and then go back where you came from. You'll settle your account behind the same door. The Town is off-limits to you from now on.
 But what about tomorrow?
 It's not coming. Nor will there be any other… solutions. It's the price you must pay for your cowardice.
 Farewell.
 As you wish… but you're making a mistake.
 Good luck… on your next try.
 Hang on. We're going back!
 To the great expanse, where the real life is. Where there's real work waiting. For both you and me… It's going to be much more interesting.
 Who <i>are</i> you, Fellow Traveler?
 How are we suddenly inseparable?
 Why are you clinging to me, huh? What do you want from me?
 Wherever you are, there I am. That's how it's going to be now. Back in town, you could've shaken me off… You had the chance. A once-in-a-lifetime chance. But you didn't.\nWise choice. Now you're going to have to put up with me until the end. And not just you… Like I said, there, in the great expanse, the harvest will be more plentiful.
 So I'm the reason you're going back into the world?
 I really could've shaken you off? Buried you there?
 Plentiful…?
 You bet.
 Well, now that we're inseparable, I'm going to hold you tight, so you don't escape.
 I don't believe you. You're lying. And I'm never going to believe you.
 That's what I was talking about… Of <i>course</i> there will be work for you. For me, collecting my dues. For you, holding me back, if you so decide. You <i>are</i> a doctor, aren't you? A notorious lover of people.\nSo we'll both have jobs to do. Forever. Where we're returning to, it won't be fun and games anymore… I'm telling you, it's real life!
 Real, huh? Well… we'll see.
 I'm sick of your chatter. Since we're stuck together forever, you might as well shut up for a while, you leech.
 Let me get some sleep. At least you won't be in my dreams, Companion.
 Yawn
 Just keep in mind that not everything is connected. The pattern is more complicated. I'm saying this as a haruspex.
 It's all in the past now. The choice has been made. No point in regrets.
 I'm flattered. But I'd rather stay here… This place needs a vet.
 …
 A scientist, thrown into the jaws of Death, hoping against hope to defeat Death. Welcomed by Death, ridiculed by Death, taunted by Death, and… fooled by Death.\nIt's as if this heretic spat into a tower of flame, expecting, somehow, to put it out. This whole place is far too crowded with Deaths.
 You've aged over these last few days. Or are you just resigned, now?
 Imperare sibi maximum imperium est.
 I told you already… I don't speak that barbaric tongue.
 Nookherni… Nүnehen zayla. It'll be fine.
 
 
 
 
 <i>Candles of every color. I'm waiting for you at the Cape now.</i>
 <i>Mother is watching me once again. I'm waiting.</i>
 
 Talon
 Beak
 
 Nothin'. I don't want to do anythin' at all.
 I've been meaning to ask you. Why'd you go to her in the first place? She was an authority, and you…
 …A thief. An' not just any thief, but a kingfish. First at the gallows. That what you mean?
 Yeah.
 My thoughts exactly! That's why I went.\nYou're no player, Cub. If you know your hand will lose, get it over with so you can pull new cards. <i>Then</i> you can make a move. That was my plan, anyway… but that's not how it shook out.
 How did it go?
 Didn't you see? I went to her ready to play cards, but she played checkers instead. Scratch that… She played <i>me,</i> like a damn flute. I couldn't have known.
 Well, she's not around anymore. Don't you want to go back?
 You worry me. You've always been weird, but you used to be lively, too.
 You're an idiot, Cub. While I was there, I realized how that giant clock operates. I used to think that I understood it, but it's only now I truly do.\nI used to be the clocksmith, oilin' the Town's gears… and I'll stay a clocksmith, only a different kind. You see?
 No. But I hope I will.
 So you've got a new grasp on time? Sounds good.
 There's nothing to do here, anyway.
 Why not just sit a while, soak up the mood? No need to make tracks.
 Speaking of tracks… What do you plan to do with your life now?
 Same here. I'm depleted.
 Idiot.
 Idiot, idiot, idiot… Do you know other words? Like you're such a genius.
 Well, I sort of am.
 Nah, I'm no less an idiot than you.
 If you need me, why didn't you call?
 It felt more exciting to wonder.
 Huh. Is it really you? Never heard you utter that word.
 I heard you adopted some kids? Orphans?
 Well, I didn't <i>adopt</i> them. They just kinda… crawled into my life.
 I prefer to keep things simple.
 I did.
 Where'd you hear that? Why would I want kids?
 Well, I've said it before. Maybe five times or so.
 Do you count your every word?
 Once a year while I was away, I bet. "I wonder where that idiot is…"
 How will you raise them? Some father you are…
 I'll figure it out.
 It's not complicated. You feed them and wipe their noses. They handle the rest.
 I think these kids have already raised themselves.
 Want my help?
 As in…?
 As in <i>just</i> help, you idiot! I just want to be useful. Make it easier for you and maybe lighten my own life a bit. You know…
 I do. And I agree.
 No. Those are my cubs.
 That's unexpected, coming from you. I'll think about it.
 No.
 We'll get to that tomorrow. Today, let's rest.
 I command you to never call me that again.
 I humbly accept your every word, oh wisest of the wise, and obey.
 Come on, drop it.
 Are you all right, Stakh? Angry with me again?
 Well, is there something to celebrate that I've missed?
 Depends on how you look at it.
 We're alive. Isn't that enough?
 You're right. There's nothing to celebrate.
 …You shouldn't have stopped me.
 I stand by my choice.
 Do you even believe yourself?
 You're right, I shouldn't have. What good is your moping? A doctor should be lively. They must inspire confidence. That's what Father used to say.
 …Or maybe you did right.
 Let's wait and see. Time heals all wounds.
 Don't give up on yourself. It's not over for you yet.
 Let your work be the judge of that.
 …You turned out just like your father, in the end. You even talk the same.
 …Thank you. I wanted to.
 No. I'm different.
 You're the one who resembles him, not me. Believe it or not, that's why I asked you to… well, to stay with me.
 Who <i>are</i> you?
 A person.
 Who are <i>you?</i>
 I told you already.
 Where are you?
 Here.
 Back here. I came round, I guess.
 I was desperate, at first. I thought we'd failed utterly.\nLike the astronomers of old, you know? The eclipse is short, it ends in the blink of an eye, and we missed the chance to observe and calculate everything we needed… and the next opportunity is a century out.
 Observe what? Calculate what?
 The following is a certificate of confirmation: This is to confirm that you, here present, declined the terms offered to you and, in order to alleviate your predicament, refused the task incumbent upon you based upon the number of your encounters with death.
 And…? What's with the pomp and circumstance?
 Uh… I didn't…
 Aren't you worried your beak will snap off from all that self-importance?
 …In reciprocity for said alleviation, you, here present, agreed to waive an important future event in what might be termed your destiny, the nature of said event being unknown to you. Confirmed by the present document as well as your facial expression.
 Yeah, that's right.
 That expression is extreme skepticism, beakhead.
 And this is that event. Right?
 …And now this event has come to pass. The game is over for you at this point. Tomorrow has been canceled, as have all subsequent days.
 Harsh. So can I go now?
 Looks like death, pal.
 Exactly so. This decision is final and without appeal.
 Come on… I was just about to make a complaint.
 Well… there's no arguing with that, I suppose.
 A deal's a deal. It's only fair.
 Wanted to cheat, did you?
 Huh? What do you mean by that?
 I did, of course. Who wouldn't?
 I didn't cheat. All I did was take the path of least resistance.
 You turned down a good thing. You shouldn't have. So, remain yourself now, as punishment.
 What good thing?
 You're afraid of death, then?
 I am.
 No. I'm not.
 You are… Everybody is. No fan of the Reaper, are you?
 Not terribly.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 So you've come…
 Yes. I have.
 No. Not a fan.
 We have a special relationship. It's a professional thing.
 What kind of professional runs from death? Talk about not putting your burial coins where your mouth is…
 It's not something I'm running away from.
 They say running does your health good. Proven fact.
 Not the worst of options.
 It was what I wanted in the first place. To remain myself, at all times.
 That's the problem, you're past explaining! Your insides are full up, no more room to stuff in this knowledge. So don't take it personally! I'm not trying to be mean, I just can't tell you. It is impossible.
 As you wish, then.
 It's all right. I'll figure it out on my own. That smart-looking guy over there will tell me. Won't be able to resist telling me.
 Nice meeting you, fellow traveler. How's it going? Enjoying the play?
 What are you doing here?
 Where's the director?
 It's not going particularly well, as you can see.
 The director went out to have a smoke. Got exhausted watching your torture.\nSo here I thought, how about I pay a visit to my fellow traveler? You must be exhausted from his… unique vision.
 Very much so.
 You don't say! The man's weird… How did it even occur to him? A person stumbles, and instead of lending a hand, he pushes them down further? Pours oil under their feet?\nIt's completely beyond me.
 I'm less than a person to him.
 Eh… I've seen worse.
 Listen, fellow traveler… I have a proposal. And I'll be blunt.\nWould you like to stop all this torture, the punishment? The hunger, the pain, the divine plagues of Egypt you endure for each new death?
 What do you mean…?
 I think… the idea is I'm supposed to value life higher because of this.
 Exactly what I meant. I'll replace you. I'm itching to act…\nYou'll become strong again. No more hunger pangs. The bony monstrosity we've all seen out on the square will vanish.\nAnd you'll no longer be punished for mistakes. You're about to perish without a single achievement… Look how pale you are. No offense.
 What bony monstrosity?
 How would you even achieve this? By strangling the director?
 And you want my soul in exchange, of course.
 Nah, I'm a light technician here… Lighting the way, so to speak. Immortell will listen to me. Don't you worry about that.\nAll you need to give is your consent. No soul required.
 And no more stupid penalties? Where do I sign?
 All right, so what's the catch? Don't say there isn't one.
 Huh… I thought you were a rag-and-bone man.
 If we strike this deal, you'll be free to die as much as you can bear. You can become Death's next-door neighbor, so to speak.\nBut in exchange, you'll lose something. Something big and important. And I won't tell you what it is. It might hurt incredibly. Or not at all.
 And here you were saying you didn't want my soul.
 "Give me what you don't know you have at home." Yeah, I've heard this one.
 Hm… I'll be the only one to suffer loss, right? No one else gets hurt?
 Pull the cloth out of your brains and think about it. Hard. These aren't just words. I <i>am</i> taking something from you, the <i>real</i> you. No huge loss, though… Maybe!\nBut you'll be free to walk the Town. Take risks, get into fights, be daring.
 Deal. Not for myself, but to get better at helping others. All these shackles slow me down.
 Deal. It's too hard.
 No deal. You want to take something, the absence of which would turn any victory to ash. I don't know what, but I sense it.
 Are you sure? I'll only offer once. You won't be able to change your mind or rewind time.\nThe choice you make now will stay with you until the end.
 I'm sure. I'll manage without shady proposals.
 No deal. Tedious bullshit is better than the fear of uncertainty.
 Are you sure? You won't be able to change your mind or rewind time. The choice you make now will stay with you until the end.
 I'm sure. No more penalties for death. In exchange for… something.
 You know… I've changed my mind. I'll try to bear all this… creativity.
 You know… I've changed my mind. Let's make a deal. No more penalties for death. In exchange for… something.
 Go and act then, my fellow traveler.
 See you around.
 Fellow Traveler
 So you haven't even noticed? Impressively unobservant… but no matter. It will disappear anyway.
 So what do you propose?
 I know you can't help but mourn the losses. But you've preserved what was most crucial—the udurgh. Because the udurgh is us—people. Children. We'll grow and build a new town—better, more balanced.
 Your words are cold… I think <i>you've</i> already grown up.
 No… I did a lot wrong.
 I can hear the White Mistress' voice.
 You're already building it.
 Where will you begin?
 Yes. You're right, Artemy.
 Where will you begin?
 I'll marry Caspar. The Kains and the Olgimskys will unite.\nThe Polyhedron, the Bull Enterprise… those were all cruel machines geared to produce utopias. Factories that processed people into ideas. But we'll make a world where people's bones aren't crushed under lofty words.
 But you don't love Khan.
 Don't you miss the Polyhedron even a little?
 You know, Victoria, you've started to take after your father.
 And you don't like me. Yet we'll be allies anyway.
 We'll see about that.
 No. It was a factory of fantasies. Beautiful, yes, but heartless. I know you didn't want to destroy it; perhaps you even regret it. But that trap suffocated children. You released them. That was a good deed, Artemy.
 I guess… You always know the right words to say.
 Not true. I admire you.
 Yes, White Mistress.
 When mother's radiance comes to full strength within me, I will fold my wings around my children, teach them to build, protect them from harm.\nThe Polyhedron, the Bull Enterprise… those were all cruel machines geared to produce utopias. Factories that processed people into ideas. But we'll make a world where people's bones aren't crushed under lofty words.
 Don't you miss the Polyhedron even a little?
 Nice speech.
 I'm not so sure.
 I think this is the first time you haven't yelled at me.
 I thought the Kains appreciated architecture.
 Oh, be silent. Why do you keep talking to me? Why do you think you're allowed to? No one <i>dared</i> harass Mother like that, but people like you are drawn to me. How can I teach you a lesson?
 Try hot iron. Or dumping boiling water on people's faces.
 Nina never shied away from people.
 Fine. I won't harass you.
 …But you see, Mother, this is precisely what makes it interesting. I don't want to move to the other side of the Gorkhon. It's too easy to step over the past. I don't like things too <i>easy.</i>\nThere are still so many people like this one here. Rough and dirty, ready be pressured into diamonds. All I need is a forge…
 Thanks, beautiful. I like you too.
 Can't you Kains live without <i>pressuring</i> people?
 …And you know, Mother, that forge is <i>me.</i> Sometimes I wake up with a burning in my chest, and the sky becomes crimson. In that very moment, if I kiss someone, they can see it too. It's true.\nThough I must admit, the first person I tried that on got insomnia and died a week later. But I'll try harder next time…
 If you need a volunteer to train with, let me know. I'd be happy to oblige.
 Crimson. Yes. Nina was Dark, but you're Crimson.
 Rat Catcher
 You're not the director.
 I'm the junior prop master. I select skulls for tragic monologues and banana peels for funny falls. And I shoo away… all… kinds… of rats!
 You have a vermin issue?
 He's back! He's back! So, did you catch your murderer? Your man of black?
 What is that supposed to mean? Who did you make me kill?
 We have this… little demon around. A repugnant creature! Even though I grew kinda used to it… But now it escaped from the Theatre into the big world! Slipped out! And I've no idea what he dragged with him.\n…Wait a second. It happened because of you, didn't it? You opened the door to come in—and he slipped out through the crack!
 I didn't come in here through the door. It works differently for me… somehow.
 I guess.
 Then it's up to you to find him! I'm not going outside, I'm too busy here.\nIt's unheard of—to have something escape into the Town from <i>our</i> theatre. It's never happened before. I shudder to imagine the consequences…
 By "your" theatre you mean this version… with the candles, right?
 So I'm free to go? There won't be any punishment?
 Yes. This one. It took me four hours to place the candles right, by the way, so don't you dare step on them.
 I won't. Am I free to go?
 So there won't be any punishment this time?
 Go. Shoo! The rat is out—that's your punishment. He's your headache now, if you find him.\nJust keep in mind… he's an actor too, in his own way. When he's in character, there's no use asking him about the Theatre of Death. Better try catching him somewhere nearby…
 "Theatre of Death"?
 Got it. Thanks. I prefer rat-catching to dying.
 Oh… no. Sorry. I misspoke. Anyway, why are you still here? Go!
 I think I understand. Kind of like "theatre of operations," yes?
 And good luck to you, too.
 Rat Prophet
 Just look at what you've grown! Unbelievable. The scale of your personality is staggering.
 Who are you?
 Aren't you the rat that escaped from the Theatre?
 Are you slow? The name's written on the right.
 I remember you. You're "the thing from below the ground." Or are you? Where did you get those legs?
 Yes. Yes, yes, yes. A child of old theatrical rags. The inhabitant of all musty places. The performer of a small but memorable role, "the thing from below the ground." Can't give you an autograph—I'm short of hands.\nEnough. This humble stage has objects more remarkable than me!
 Fair enough. What are these poles?
 The Rat Prophet, huh…
 Do you really have no hands…?
 Like you do! You swing your paws whenever the script allows, but you can't even punch Fat Vlad's face—or jerk my tail.\nAt least I got this magnificent costume for my suffering. What do you have?
 My clothes aren't so bad, either.
 I can do whatever I want. Or… at least I could before I got cursed.
 Fine. So what's that thing over the square?
 See this ulcer? A metastasis in the world's body. It grew because you keep dying, jackass.\nYour deaths are make believe, but the world rots for real. That's how big a character you are, Ripper. Impressive!
 I didn't understand a word of that.
 Wait, but…
 An ulcer! A tumor! An abscess! A boil! How can I make it more clear? And you call yourself a doctor…\nOr did you think your deaths only concerned you? An actor is inseparable from the audience—they're a manifestation of their expectations. So if you keep suffering, sooner or later everyone will.
 My mistakes hurt the whole world? That's not fair.
 More fair than you think. \nOh, but stop fretting. It's just a piece of wood. Or bone, maybe… some pranker just stuck it in the ground, that's all.
 But you just said…
 I'm not fretting.
 Look. Whenever you find yourself in the Theatre again and the stage is empty, know that I must be close. We'll continue our improvisation then.\nFor now, enjoy your freedom and have fun swinging your arms.
 I keep my arms in check. A surgeon's hands are too valuable a tool.
 See you around, then.
 I've been wondering… Perhaps you're doing this on purpose? Botching lines, falling from the stage? Constantly kicking the bucket?\nYou just want to see what it all leads to, don't you?
 I'm not doing this on purpose, no.
 Suspicious Note
 The handwriting is childish.
 "Found your thief. He'll come to Friday's Yard. Wait for him there. Just hit him first, he's a nutso. 450."
 Mysterious Note
 "The ripper's murderer will come to Friday's Yard when pigs fly. You hear that, ripper? We found him!"
 The handwriting is childish and rushed.
 You must think I'm nuts if you believe I'll just… let this slide!
 …Are you mad?
 Anyway. That was a good game. But we don't want to play with you anymore.
 Why the hell?
 Who was it?
 I don't want to play your games anymore, either. Good luck with your life.
 We took you in, and you were greedy! We told you, there were rules. And you haven't written a single note…\nYou didn't play fair. Yeah.
 So <i>I'm</i> the guilty one? Come on!
 A murderer.
 Who did he kill?
 You're no better. You told me you'd found a murderer… <i>the</i> murderer. Was that fair?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Wrinkled Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "Two fluffy tails for a teapot. Needed SOON! The tails are good as new. TL, every noon."
 Funny Note
 "Riddle: A step and a step. A person equals one. One equals two of different colors. (seohS)"
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Stained Note
 "This note is poisonous."
 "WHO LET ЯISKA OUT OF THE CAN! At least put the lid back!"
 Unhappy Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "If a grown-up learns of our game, I'll strangle you one by one, you won't escape."
 Angry Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Unfunny Note
 "Two and one: Father's gone. Four and three: Mom hangs from a tree. Six and five: How are you still alive?"
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "Chapter Two. Said Woodpecker, 'You're too late! That’s one thing I TRUELY hate.'"
 Modest Note
 Exhausted Note
 "We've combed the district. He's not there. Found Riska though."
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "To the boy who writes TRUELY I know your a boy. Its TRULY."
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Snarky Note
 Sly Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "I'll tell you who wrote the Cap if you leave a bent clock hand on this note."
 "Black took another one! Let everyone know we're not letting it slide."
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Moody Note
 Lost Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "Guys he needs a way to remove blood stains. If you know one, leave a note."
 Torn Note
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 "If you do that once again I'll cut you all fingers off!"
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Snide Note
 "I told you, just tie a thread to your finger and it won't touch you!"
 "BAM! I took your memories. The rule is: now pretend you didn't live the day before yesterday and know nothing of anything."
 Faded Note
 Curious Note
 "Here's a new game: two peeples hold hands from the back and draw one picture together on the ground, each standing on one leg."
 Wet Note
 "FORGET NEELA'S CRAWL! The boards have gone all rotten. I fell down so hard I almost broke my neck."
 Scratched Note
 "I'll lead you to the Nest for a bunch of good feathers. No peanuts. Leave a stash in the leaving place, by the root."
 Fragrant Note
 "TL, after the street lamps light up: a writer meetup, the readings of Dusty Cap."
 Cold Note
 "Remind yourself that I know what you owe."
 Loud Note
 "A brave knight looking for a squire for a dangerous quest. Paying in green marbles. See you at dawn by the Big Tree."
 How about taking my place and trying for yourself?
 That thing above you… The ulcer… It became bigger.
 And do note a curious thing: it's not Earth rotting. It's Sky. This tumor is growing up.
 So what does it mean?
 Will it keep growing?
 Are you sure it's because of me?
 I don't know. I don't know anything. I'm small fry myself, Burakh… It's Burakh, isn't it?
 Burakh.
 I'm as much Burakh as you're the Rat Prophet.
 Tsk, tsk. You're late. For shame, sir. For shame.
 What's going on? Where am I?
 Let me through! I need to get back to town. I didn't make it on time…
 You're late. You quite definitively didn't make it. Come on in, collect your payment. Don't detain us further.
 Ugh.
 Is there really nothing that can be done?
 Was it that difficult a task? Not at all, if you ask me. Of course, it would've involved some legwork. But you were given enough time.\nAnd you never found those wretched papers, meaning you never wanted to. Move along.
 What's going on outside? What's the Town up to? Was it shelled, or not?
 I did want to!
 Town's gone, my dear. The show has been interrupted due to a lack of interest on the part of the protagonist. Right at the climax, too!
 Who does something like this? Stopping the whole thing just short of the denouement?
 Can I come back? Please? I'll act my part better. I'll find the papers.
 Whatever. I'm sick of your show already. Should I talk to Immortell, then?
 That's a question for you, sir. Not for me.
 I see. Well.
 It's nothing but questions with you people…
 You should be more careful, Burakh. I don't like this tumor at all.
 Neither do I.
 I'll try.
 Do you know how one can tell a simple mole from a malignant melanoma?\nIt's symmetry. Natural processes are symmetrical. An arm on the left, an arm on the right… Each action bears a symmetrical reaction… but illness is twisted. It grows to the side.
 Not all good things are symmetrical. To the contrary, actually…
 The heart is on the side, too. The left side.
 It's a myth, actually. The heart is located almost directly in the center of your chest. Some doctor you are…
 Almost. But not entirely.
 Farewell, Burakh.
 Farewell? Why?
 Farewell, Rat.
 The tumor is complete, see? The ulcer is ripe now. Grasping at the sky with its metastases, growing into it.\nNow it's sewn to the ground forever, unable to escape.
 That doesn't sound too bad.
 So now what?
 What does it have to do with you?
 Me… I'm just a trash rat, Burakh. Field voles make nests from herbs; I make mine from rot, so to speak. I'll climb up there and inhabit it. Spitting down rot on your heads from above, heh heh heh…
 How are you going to climb it? You have no hands!
 The tenant fits the house, I guess.
 It'll suck me in… and you, too… It'll suck the whole world in.\n'Cause you've rotted it all. It's all just metastases and tumors now. None of us will have hands or feet soon…
 Don't you try to shift the blame to me. I wasn't the one who made this plague happen.
 I'm sorry, funny rat. I hope you don't disappear completely.
 You grow gloomier each day, fellow traveler. Did anything happen?
 Lots of things. How's it going for you?
 Ah, fellow traveler. Look what I have here… a curious thing.
 What's so curious about a common belt?
 Want a riddle? A local kid told me.
 Sure. Surprise me.
 Why do you have that ridiculous grin on your face? What are you looking at? Isn't this what you wanted? Isn't this why you preserved the Town's seeds? There will be a harvest soon. It won't be long.
 I'm not sure… I guess you're right, that this is what I wanted.
 Fair enough… I wanted life to go on. So it does.
 You know, Ripper… You're not such a bad person. There was no love lost between you and my parents, but you helped them anyway. It's hard to protect someone you don't like. Harder than saving cubs. \nSo don't wander too far. We're still connected, you and I. And there's a great deal ahead of us.
 It's nice to be appreciated.
 You know, Ripper… You aren't such a bad person. You didn't even hesitate when you took that awful poison to protect the orphan girl. By the Crowstone, remember? That was very brave.\nSo don't wander too far. We're still connected, you and I. And there's a great deal ahead of us.
 It's nice to be appreciated.
 God forbid.
 God forbid.
 Now go. What will happen here is not for your eyes. Someone's waiting for you elsewhere. Can't you hear?
 I can.
 I can't.
 Yes, let's start slow. You won't be able to hug anyone anymore. Ever.
 Who cares?
 I don't have anyone to hug, anyway.
 Well… You won't be able to express affection. If you want to so much as hold anyone, you'll have to improvise.
 I don't "hold" people. I respect the boundaries of others.
 I'll figure something out. As they say: watch my hands.
 You know… That feeling when hunger turns to starvation, when it starts to kill you? That will come quicker now.
 That's all right. I'm used to an empty stomach.
 You walk his paths—Burakh's paths! And they are so very difficult. Each step drains your strength, drives you closer to death.\nThe paths narrow, shorten. You won't be able to meander as much from now on.
 What do you mean?
 That you're trying to trick me.
 Well done! And not entirely untrue. Not now, though; now, we work for real. Today's subject is attrition. Burden. Exhaustion.
 If anything makes me exhausted, it's this circus of yours…
 Work, then. Without me. Your play is here; I play outside.
 I walk my own path.
 I keep thinking… I've been exhausted for a year. And still…
 Could I have a different punishment instead?
 Life.
 You know things by touch. You can feel their attributes—clear enough to not confuse a precious item with trash. If you do, you'll spoil the end.
 Trash? Such as…?
 Such as a surgeon who can't tell a liver or a heart from wool. That trash. Such a person would turn our play into a puppet show for sick children.
 You'd make a decent Pulcinella.
 Well? What does it mean?
 In a theatre, everything is a prop…
 The world is dying in your hands. You're turning the living into the dead, while it should be the other way around. How do you do it?
 I'm doing everything as usual.
 I don't know. Somehow.
 What was I supposed to learn? How not to die?
 You're ruining the experiment. You're turning real acting into puppetry.\nYou have no right to do that—it's <i>so</i> disrespectful. Is it so hard for you to live? Inhabiting the current circumstances is your job! I'll give you one more try. Do better this time!
 I'm trying as hard as I can!
 Disrespectful? Look who's talking!
 Go outside and try surviving a day! That'll be a learning experience.
 Because outside the walls of the Theatre, the triumph of death is <i>real!</i> That is why you must act there, not here.
 Why isn't the stage enough?
 I need to work you loose. That's the whole point of the method. Simon's victory over death had nothing to do with him living past two hundred and eleven.
 He overcame death by accepting it? And then dying?
 Two hundred eleven? Seriously? I had no idea.
 Not <i>defeated.</i> Overcome. It's not the same. And, well, there are different ways.
 The Kains, for example, seem to believe that you only need to <i>want</i> hard enough, and you can achieve anything. The naivete…
 Look who's here… Time to get real, then. You wanted to come round. Let's see if it worked.\nSo, what do you think? Are you back?
 I don't think anything.
 "Come round"? I didn't faint.
 Back where?
 Is this some kind of game?
 What do you mean?
 I'm dead tired…
 Ugh.
 I'm… everywhere.
 No one.
 Artemy Burakh.
 A haruspex. A Warden. A Knower-of-Lines.
 The man who tore this town apart and bound it back together.
 Why do you ask?
 Humanity. Their limits. Their struggle to conquer death.\nThis play wasn't the best. A flop, honestly. But it wasn't useless. I see much clearer now… and I know how to improve it. The next show will be better!
 How do you see it going?
 So there'll be another performance?
 A flop? You're too harsh.
 We chose the wrong hero: someone who didn't fear death at all. Disrespectful, crude, and flippant.\nWe'll use a different archetype next time. A person obsessed with the idea of defeating death. Death's nemesis, so to speak… Someone who has <i>studied</i> it. 
 I think you're the one obsessed with death.
 Of course. The show must go on.
 Why? Wasn't this one tortuous enough?
 Uh huh. Good luck with the smartass. He'll surely win.
 Death cannot be defeated, but it can be overcome. Not by prolonging life, no—the struldbrug method is ridiculous and stupid. People aren't yet strong enough to bear their own internal hell, or rid themselves of it.\nThat's not how you overcome death. We've found the true way.
 I'm all ears.
 How many of you were here—the actors who played the Haruspex?
 I don't remember… I didn't count.
 One.
 None.
 I'm Burakh. I'm not an actor.
 Where was the real Haruspex?
 Around, somewhere… on his own.
 He belonged to history… or just a story? In any case, you knew about his adventures beforehand. You <i>planned</i> them.
 Gradually, the actor became him. They would only act the part while replaying a section… and <i>become</i> Haruspex upon unlocking new events.
 When one died, another took their place. This line is made of small segments. It could be infinite… if not in length, then in width.
 How does one overcome death?
 They're broken into many separate beings.
 They step out of their feeble body.
 They transcend the self. That's what the sand pest tried to do. Depersonalize us.
 The body is susceptible to death! As is the self. As is any being trapped within its bounds. They invite death the way a lantern invites insects!\nBut that which is broken into many bodies, many selves, many perceptions—<i>that</i> thing can resist it.
 You're right. To connect two things, you must first break them apart, because connection implies difference… and previous separation. Only connections defeat death.
 That sounds too complicated.
 This makes no sense.
 But this doesn't solve the death of the physical body, and bodies matter. Even towns have bodies. Even people who become towns do.
 "I have been in a multitude of shapes, before I assumed a consistent form," as an ancient poet once said. Who are you?
 Whoever.
 I'm Artemy Burakh.
 That's no one's business but mine.
 This question is a trap.
 Our work here is done. You can go to the dressing room and take off the costume. Remember the place? It's where you started.\nGood luck. And thank you for taking part in our daring experiment.
 No. I've found myself, and that's who I'm going to stay. I am Artemy Burakh. I don't want to take this mask off. I'm going back to the Town. Back there I'm expected… and loved.
 Thank you. The act has worn thin, and I don't want to play anymore. So I guess I exit through the small door to the right—the dressing room… and go back home.
 Another trap? I don't want to choose a door. What if I stay here, in the Theatre? Maybe even take your place? Would you like that, dear Mark?
 It's all over anyway. This choice is meaningless.
 But what does that mean for me…?
 You've always been one…
 Did you know that the north wind is silver, the east wind is musky, the dawn wind is white, and the west wind is violet?
 Weird colors… It's hard to tell white from silver. What's the difference?
 Musky? Is that a color, too?
 Of course not. It's a smell. And a taste, too.
 So why do most winds have colors, but this one has a smell? It's an odd classification.
 But it's more interesting this way. If the winds were red, blue, yellow, and green, they'd be very bland, don't you think?
 I guess you're right.
 What about red, blue, white, and black?
 I've seen that somewhere before.
 I guess.
 Why did you tell me this?
 Our Mistresses used to be unbearably straightforward. Black and White. Dark and Light. Evil and Good. Wild and Warm… Too simple.\nIt'll be more compelling now.
 Well… I'm glad the dead will have their own Mistress. For personal reasons.
 You're not the only one. This town has more dead than living, now.
 You're right… It's easier to count the living. The rest are dead.
 Just take care of yourself, all right?
 I hope you take good care of them.
 There are thousands of them, and you're just one girl. Well, not just any girl… a Mistress.
 Beshe, beshe… And who will you be?
 Well, I was just looking for someone to help me. You're the one everyone will listen to, after all.
 Not a Mistress, I'm afraid.
 Be khara, you are a good man. You've got funny ears, but that's all right. That'll do. And I'll be the Mistress of Bulls.
 What about the Kin, though?
 You mean… these new ones?
 Them, too. But they will go, and ours will stay.
 Leave bulls to butchers and odonghe. It's their job.
 Yamar berkhe basaghan bai!
 That'll do, huh? Thanks, kiddo! Glad I meet your high standards.
 The Kin <i>are</i> the bulls.
 There are people in it, too.
 Nuh uh. More bulls than people now. Much less human than before. It's so awesome now! Come and see for yourself. Will you come?
 Oh, yeah. I will have to now, some day.
 That was… to be expected. And appropriate…
 Be khara, you'll make a great Mistress. Bayartay, kiddo.
 A good one.
 I meant, the Mistress of what? Mistresses don't exist in isolation. They always have… domains.
 Mother was a sole Mistress.
 Yeah, and look how that turned out.
 And it drove her mad.
 It's not surprising.
 Can you at least tell me now—who <i>are</i> you?
 It's all so very sad, yes. But that's only because she tried to take Nina's place. That corrupted her soul and let darkness into her heart. It's because she didn't find her own path first. And I have.
 But… But… Just… Please tell me. Are you even human?
 I am.
 What kind of human are you?
 You'd better be. I'm counting on you.
 Are you really a saint?
 I've been dead certain you're the plague.
 It wasn't me. Don't <i>glare</i> at me like that.
 Fine. I believe you.
 Nope. Still not convinced.
 I don't know if I'm good or evil. Stupid words, anyway… But I'm trying to be gentle to others and hard on myself. I know how to sympathize and not judge. I try to love whoever I touch. That's the only answer I have.
 Well… that's what I wanted to hear.
 You don't seem too excited.
 You don't seem like too kind a person, girl saint.
 I hope things work out for you.
 You're still bizarre. But I guess we'll see.
 We've all been in hell these last few days. And still are, if you didn't notice.
 Are you saying we've died and don't know it? An old idea… and boring.
 Maybe.
 Bullshit. We're alive. I'm alive. I know that.
 Yes.
 Wrong. I've been there.
 There's a cruel glint in your eye… It's fitting that you're drawn here, to Olonngo, the Ford. You belong here.
 It's just a throat.
 You're free to stay in hell if you want. To be honest, I always felt like that's exactly where you crawled out from.
 It may not.
 Try jumping down there yourself. Although…no. Bad idea.
 You'll carry your own hell within you. Let it gnaw on you. That's what you deserve.
 I don't.
 We will not fraternize. There will be no closure.
 Shi yuunde yereebshe? Why have you come, then? This is my place. The place where beasts come to suffer and die. The place for me. Leave me here… Kindred.
 I am leaving you here, Foreman of the Abattoir.
 If you're too weak to carry your blame, kill yourself.
 I'm not weak.
 Then live and endure. Perhaps something will change after years pass.
 You are cruel.
 I can hardly stand looking at you, murderer of my father.
 I've nothing more to say.
 You are. A coward twice over.
 Baarhani, baarhani…
 I wanted less. I never expected… this.
 Neither did I…
 Ene shi yuun khun geeshebshe! Look at me, essegher! How I love you! How I admire you! \nYou are a true emshen, a true knower of the Lines. You chose the path of love. The path of pity. You took pity on us, the weak, the dying, the doomed…
 C'mon. No need to embellish, Sahba.
 Unente. I did.
 From their graves, things that had no place in this new world looked at you. Weak, dying, depleted things. Yet you saw life in them! Your gaze revived the unliving. You poured our blood back, returned us our lives, refused to let us be buried.\nGaze at me, emshen!
 I am.
 Really, I mean it… There's no need for this.
 You came into your father's inheritance, emshen. Following the Lines, drawing the Lines, you wove the Town back into its proper shape, and never betrayed your people.\nWe stared at you mutely. Said our goodbyes. Resigned ourselves to fate. Yet, you never abandoned the weak. Never abandoned us.
 Enough, Sahba Usp'tae. Stop it. Temper your rapture.
 I just… wanted to preserve a sliver of the miraculous in this world.
 Oshysh daa, go. I will always watch over you. From beneath Earth's skin, I will watch over you. Wherever I can reach, I will protect you. \nLike Mother Boddho… I shall caress your step.
 Come now…
 See you again, someday.
 Yes, I'm going. Goodbye, Sahba.
 I'd like to think that. But the sand pest will return, and will destroy those connections again.
 You're always so untimely… with all due respect, doctor.
 But we do have common ground.
 I'm sorry about your Tower, Caspar.
 I had utmost respect for your father, Master Burakh. We weren't friends, and neither will I be your friend. But respect is possible. It's up to us.
 What do you plan to do now?
 No. I didn't talk to you as much as I should have.
 Capella plans, not me. We'll do everything together from now on. Ask her.
 Tough.
 Not what I dreamt of doing.
 I'm sorry, kid. I really am.
 I guess you'll have to find a new venture, then. But you Kains appreciate self-development, don't you?
 So she's in charge? Somehow, I'm not surprised.
 Өөriy kheleer yar, basaghan.
 You are, but in the wrong company. You're playing with fire.
 What? I don't know <i>that</i> many words yet.
 So you want to be an Herb Bride?
 Shi yuunde ereebshe? Go home.
 People pass on… but things remain. Lots to do.
 Makes sense.
 People are different, and all hoarders, too. One needs a keen eye to tell the things they need from the things they don't. So people get attached to junk that should have been discarded in the first place.
 Like life. Was that what you meant?
 Whenever it's used, it's for a short stay. Whoever buys it, gives it away. Whoever needs it, doesn't yet know. Faced with it, you'll never say no.
 That's too simple.
 It's a coffin. The Army is in town, haven't you seen? So we'll now need twice as many coffins.
 You're not a coffin maker, though, even though you ride one.
 Eh… a couple of rags and boots, that's all those troops are good for. They drop like flies, with no artistry. To hell with them. Another riddle?
 Go ahead.
 Made from cow leather. Rather old. Passed on for three or four generations… before it got to me. Worn down, with a notched buckle. So many additional holes made in it…
 Not a particular rarity.
 So many children set straight with this belt. Parental authority is unbroken… They have a special way of educating kids. Cruel, but efficient, don't you think?
 We all had to bear it when we were kids.
 Poison.
 A coffin.
 Maybe. Still, the answer…?
 Poison.
 A coffin.
 I give up.
 I don't know.
 Father never hit me.
 Here, look at this crack. It wasn't his fault—it was the cat—but the parental response was to teach a lesson. He could've tricked them, sure, but the parent would have got him by the collar, anyway.\nThat face… so distant, so indignant. I love such faces. They're funny.
 You truly are a master of your work, rag-and-bone man.
 Guess the owner was starving.
 A belt, huh… I used to have one like it.
 Gee, I wonder! Look how nice and peaceful it is around!
 No one ever gives anything away voluntarily, that much is true.
 No. I'm tired of riddles.
 One was enough.
 Whoever likes it, can't take it away. Whatever you do, it's forever to stay. What is it?
 Time.
 Opinion.
 Wrong. This one has no correct answer. Anything can be taken away.
 Really…
 You're right.
 Word.
 Right.
 I give up…
 This one has no correct answer, anyway. Anything can be taken away.
 Really…
 What kind of a riddle doesn't have an answer?!
 Your son will come then. Wrap it all up after you.
 I suppose.
 …I'll have a son?
 You already do. And you'll have more. And a daughter. Enough heirs to knit back whatever you unravel in your old age.
 Sounds good…
 Is that so? I didn't know.
 I don't want a fate like Father's. I don't.
 I thought you were dead.
 From the Earth I came, to the Earth I return. Am I dead? All things live, now.
 Intense.
 Why do you call me that, Sahba? You're not my mother.
 Bi oylgono ugyb… I don't understand.
 Before? No… no. The past is in the past… Buried.\nYet she lives… She's buried, but hasn't passed away. I'll follow her legacy. Coming here every day… Listening to her advice…
 Where will you start?
 Huh. I expected to see you broken, boös.
 Me? Broken? No one has ever seen that… and no one ever will. Yes, no better time for hard work… than now. Time to get dirty again… No one's better suited for that… than me. No one.
 Where will you start?
 I'll start with myself, my boy… with myself. My seventh decade is just around the corner… Now is the time.
 Fair enough.
 The Bull Enterprise is dead.
 Good luck, boös Vlad.
 It is sick, my boy… merely sick. It will get better. You are a healer of humans, but I… I'm used to this patient. As one doctor to another… trust me. It'll live.
 We'll see.
 I hope it changes.
 Expecting to live long, I see… boös.
 Put the bottle down, Peter. You've had enough.
 You really don't. She's asleep.
 You've had enough, pal. And miracles don't exist. You don't see that? They're incompatible with life.
 No.
 Then why the fuck are you gawking at me like there's anything for us to talk about?
 Easy there, architect.
 Burakh. Just tell me one thing. Look me in the eye and say it. Could you have protected him? Could you have… saved him?
 …Yes. I could have.
 I'm not gawking. I'm just looking.
 Listen, brother…
 What did you say? "Brother"? Who the fuck gave you the right to call me brother?
 Calm down!
 Shush… I misspoke.
 No, I couldn't have.
 My fucking condolences! Happy now?
 You're clearly not happy to see me.
 I wanted to… to apologize. For Peter.
 I'll find the fuckers. I'll spend the rest of my days searching. I'll tear that general's throat out with my bare hands… I'll get the officers who gave the order, and the ones who stood by and watched, and the soldiers who manned the cannon, the ones who aimed it.
 What for?
 What for?! For the Tower. Have you ever lost a child?
 No.
 …I'm not gonna answer that question.
 You have no idea, obviously. I can tell.\nThirty-two people will pay for it with their lives. I've counted. Military fuckers… I'll follow them first thing tomorrow.
 Andrey, listen… Leave those thirty-two people alone. It… it was me. I did it.
 I don't.
 You?
 Me.
 Good luck with that.
 No. It was the cannon. So melt it down and leave people alone.
 Emshen.
 Oynon.
 Erdem.
 Did I say it right? "Emshen"?
 Not exactly. You need to swallow the vowels, like you can't open your mouth… Oh, forget it.
 Bachelor.
 You did.
 Well… this is it, I guess.
 This is it, erdem.
 Just call me by name. We don't want you to break your jaw.
 This pursuit of immortality will cost me my life. I doubt the Powers That Be in the Capital ever cared whether or not I could defeat death. They just threw the heretic into the fire, hoping he'd never return. Excuse the pathos.
 Cost you your life? Come now.
 It's just the beginning, oynon.
 Did someone send you here? I thought you came on your own accord.
 Yeah… You're right, I'm confused. I haven't been so drunk since my student years. Then again, it's hard to knock a doctor off their feet. I can still think, just… not straight.
 So… Cheers, I guess?
 …
 There is no death.
 Stay here. A new tower will grow, just you wait. I say this as… a friend.
 I'd rather you calculated me. You're good at… calculations.
 An ass-what? You know me, Yulia. Artemy no like big words.
 I'll think about it. Perhaps I'll go.
 Me, hate? I adore children. Even professionally, sawbones! I'm a circus performer. I've handled more children than a midwife.
 Wait, you're from the Caravan. The Caravan! The wandering, children-kidnapping circus!
 You? Like children? They frighten you nearly to tears!
 So, medenegshe, here's another law for you.\nNever hold a grudge, for grudges are bad for health and sneak behind. Be khara, whoever carries a grudge, shall slip on it and break their neck. So speaks Suok; she'll see to it at night. Tiimel daa, let it be so.
 Fair enough.
 Medenegshe, heed our law.\nNever deceive or betray the small ones and the ones that trust you. It is not only Suok's nocturnal law; Mother Boddho would turn away from you, too. No harming the small ones, tiimel daa. Let it be so.
 Those are some good laws, kid…
 Medenegshe, now for the most important law. The law of candy, sweets, and those soft white thingies they sell in shops. They are to be abundant. No one has the right to forbid eating them.\nMother Boddho… Somehow she will not see to this law. So I'll have to do it myself. Tiimel daa… Oh, I wonder what I should invent next?
 I think that's enough law for one day. You've done a great job, kid.
 Why are you here? She yuunded ereebshe? Did you come to listen to our not-so-highness?
 I just… wanted to take a look at you.
 Well done! Spoken like a true Mother Superior! Tiimel daa.
 Hey, are you all right up there, dyy basaghan? Are your feet not cold?
 Nope! Ene shi yuun khun gheeshebshe. Please don't interrupt!
 I just…
 I humbly obey, Mother Superior.
 Yamar berkhe basaghan dai!
 Tiimel daa.
 You're a harsh ruler…
 How am I harsh? Those aren't even my words, baygalday!
 All right, go on.
 Hara bosooli, it didn't take you long to fit into your new role…
 You're a cruel man, Kindred. Should have killed me.
 I have forgiven you. I mean it. <i>He</i> would, too.
 You'll carry your own hell within you. Let it gnaw on you. That's what you deserve.
 If you're too weak to carry your blame, kill yourself.
 I don't.
 We will not fraternize. There will be no closure.
 You are triumphant now, Kindred. Yet time will pass… and you will find yourself upturned. What was once atop the wheel, will find itself dragged down. You'll see. Tiimel dee.
 I'm leaving you here, Foreman of the Abattoir.
 Baarhani, baarhani…
 I'm not weak.
 Then live and endure. Perhaps something will change after years pass.
 You are. A coward twice over.
 You are cruel.
 I can hardly stand looking at you, murderer of my father.
 I've nothing more to say.
 Shi yuunde yereebshe? Why have you come, then?
 Not after you.
 This is my town, akhar. I go where I please.
 See this stone horn, Kindred? Know you what it is?
 No.
 Olonngo used to be a temple. This town was but steppe roads, with steppe gates as its bridges. Olonngo used to be the bull's head. We had no word for "town," then.\nNow a town has grown on our back. Pressed Olonngo down. We used to be a head, and now we are…
 Why are you telling me this?
 It's true.
 I do.
 I'm not triumphant. Not at all.
 What are you doing here, chief?
 I just came to listen. Fiery girl, isn't she? When she's a bit older, I'll definitely lure her into our gang.
 Like hell you will.
 She's out of your league, boy. Got a whole herd of Halves, that one.
 …What's my Half like?
 It's huge.
 So you're taking me into your gang, huh?
 Holy… Thanks, kid. Now, give me a minute, I need to get all this laughter out of my system.
 Fine. I'm a patient man.
 In the end, it didn't work out your way. I knew it would hurt you, and I am sorry.
 Don't say that…
 I didn't know what I was doing!
 Why have you come?
 People often visit Mistresses. And here…
 I like this place. It's soothing.
 See? All the Mistresses are here.
 Isn't it a bit too crowded?
 It's perfect.
 Why are you here?
 So you plan to become a Mistress yourself?
 I guess… Think I'll fail?
 What are you good at?
 Aren't you a bit young to be Mistresses?
 Divination. I told your fortune, didn't I? That you'd spill rivers of blood? And you did… Drowned the whole square in it. Am I wrong?
 You're right.
 It's… it's different.
 No it isn't.
 I never wanted to…
 Just… getting to know each other. Each came here seemingly spontaneously, each for her own reasons, spurred by her own thoughts… But in truth, we're getting to know each other.
 That's some complex diplomacy, girls.
 We aren't <i>girls.</i> We're Mistresses. In a couple years, you'll see.
 But <i>what</i> will I see?
 Even two were too many.
 That's not for you to judge.
 Why not?
 So what are you doing here? Partitioning out domains?
 All right. Play Mistresses. Can't see any harm in this game.
 Enough miracles. Enough for a lifetime.
 You did.
 No.
 What are you doing here?
 I can see the two of you are sharing a moment. I will be on my way.
 It's up to you to be worthy of respect.
 What if I refuse to bring any of the Olgimskys to the Kin?
 Divination. I saw your… rivers of blood too. And you spilled them. Drowned the whole square. So I was right, wasn't I?
 Divination's easy in hindsight.
 It's… it's different.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What do you mean?
 Because they're dangerous. They'll eat you.
 What do you mean… eat me? Why? When?
 As soon as you finish that charming melody.
 During your first dance.
 Why…? Because that's the steppe way. Go home, girl. Don't play with fire.
 Yeah… That's where I live.
 And why the hell are you here?
 You know, I've always felt torn… Drawn to the steppe, to the herbs, to dreams of dancing with the Brides… But also to the Cathedral. I'm not sure why—I guess it's my fate?\nSo I stayed home, neither here nor there… and <i>now</i> look! It's all come together!
 Not sure it's to your benefit.
 Yamar berkhe basaghan bai!
 What…?
 It means "Attagirl!" You're walking a dangerous line here.
 So you want to be an Herb Bride?
 Come over here.
 Who are you?
 You're dressed strangely.
 I live in the Stillwater.
 Oh!
 So are you.
 I think I saw you before…
 They're discussing what they're planning to build next. And I'm listening. So interesting!
 So what are they saying?
 Haven't they built enough? The Town already strangles the Gorkhon.
 I guess.
 So what about that… grand construction project?
 What do you have here?
 I don't know, either. So interesting! Daniil was fascinated by it, too. He kept asking around, looking at documents…
 Should've spent more time working on the vaccine instead.
 You two were close, weren't you?
 I guess.
 Anyway. This town existed long before those Oneirotects.
 That's so strange… So many strong and resolute people have died, yet a daisy like you survives…
 More engineering metaphors…
 I meant an onager, of course, to be more precise. I just used the word "catapult" to make the idea easier to digest.
 So considerate of you, Judge.
 No. What is a "normal person," anyway? What is the "norm"? Think it over, dear Haruspex, lest you blurt out something really ignorant and find yourself in an awkward position.
 Yeah… It's unwise to get into arguments with you.
 Or other kinds of fights, young man.
 Why do you want to… propel humanity forward? And where? The coldness of space?
 Then I'll leave you to your thoughts.
 Of course. For I am the Judge.
 Father… He didn't do it on purpose.
 Your brother… He and my father…
 Of course he did.
 I mean, it was bound to happen one way or another.
 This plague would come back to haunt us anyway!
 Correct. And the great people who guarded our town against it before were withering and dying. There was no time to waste.
 I guess.
 Yes.
 What do you mean?
 They had a different daughter before.
 Forget it. Bad choice of words.
 And?
 It didn't end well. But perhaps it'll go better with you.
 Forget about it. I'm happy you've found each other.
 It'll take you a long time to count all the dead. Your hair will turn grey.
 So what?
 Nothing. So your parents are teaching you?
 I can't seem to get a good look at you… Wait. Yes. I remember. You're Isidor's son.\nBut I did not call for help.
 What are you doing here?
 I simply came here to see. A Mistress should know her town, don't you agree?\nThen people came, who doubted that I am me and wanted to be sure. Suspecting that I'm not a real Mistress seems quite popular these days.
 So they locked you in this house and nailed the door shut?
 What were they trying to find out?
 Trapping someone inside an infected building is practically murder.
 Do you know the ancient way to identify a witch? If she drowns, she's innocent. If she survives, she must be a witch—off to the stake with her.\nAnd our town's residents have taken to testing people with the plague. They call it "sandboxing." What charming folk.
 Has this been going on long?
 Come, I'll escort you out of here.
 Since the Middle Ages.
 Come with me.
 I'm not done here yet. Be on your way now. I'm waiting for someone and don't need you around for that conversation.
 Well, I've removed the boards. You're free to go.
 Who are you waiting for?
 That's what they thought. Do you imagine that those boards can measure up to the prison I've languished in for years? Hmph.
 This place is dangerous.
 What are you talking about?
 Do you imagine that those boards can measure up to the prison I've languished in for years? Hmph.\nGo, Burakh. Cure the ones who need it. I can deal with this house without your help.
 So you are a witch after all…
 The most horrible prisons are always internal.
 Aspity
 This is my final hour. Death stands at my door.
 I'm not his harbinger. Actually, I'm kind of the opposite.
 You reek of meat, man of heavy hands. And of blood. And misfortune…
 Yeah… People keep saying that.
 You're a steppe man, aren't you? You're Kin? Tell me how to walk the steppe right.
 Clearly I have nothing better to do than teach you steppe-walking.
 It's empty and silent. Soulless. A week ago, I had a dream. I was walking down its aisle… or rather, falling. I woke up and thought… Ah, it doesn't matter.\nAnyway, I'm curious about what exactly went wrong with Farkhard's plan, and if the Cathedral can be fixed. I'll ask around.
 Don't. It's fine as is.
 Your interest in local history is commendable.
 Honestly! Are you actually trying to console me?
 Sorry. I shouldn't have said that.
 Yes. There's a life ahead of us now.
 Relax. I can see she's just an ordinary human to you.
 Where did she go, Grief? Snap out of it for a second.
 And to you, she's what? A three-headed dragon?
 Perhaps she is.
 Whatever… Sooner or later, she'll leave, and you'll return to normal. Hopefully you won't become a monk. Where is she?
 Nah, she just sent them a portrait of herself. Of course she went on her own! Are you all right in the head, Cub?
 What orders did she send?
 Why do you care? If they actually shot the witch, we should bow down an' kiss their feet. But they didn't, and won't. She's not so simple.
 Perhaps I do care.
 I see… Do you have anything here to eat?
 An idiot, are you? I'm feastin' on my former sins. I'm far from starvation.
 You're the idiot.
 Great. Well, see you.
 I guess.
 You freak…
 I'm listening.
 I'm a surgeon. Artemy Burakh.
 Same as usual, I think…
 So I'm taking her?
 Yes. It's the right thing to do.
 Still, no.
 Then who was wailing?
 I don't know. Someone in a different room, maybe.
 You're alone in this house, Katerina.
 
 Huh. I can't smell it anymore, myself. Got used to it, I guess.
 I'm a doctor. Here to check up on you.
 I'm a doctor who's making a cure for this plague.
 Burakh, doctor. At your service.
 Ah, I remember now. You were in the report. What means are currently at our disposal to combat the outbreak? Briefly, please.
 Briefly? None.
 There are four doctors in town. Dankovsky, a theorist; a girl who performs miracles; Rubin, a forensic specialist; and me, a surgeon. That's all.
 I have a recipe for a serum, but it's useless.
 Anything to add?
 No.
 What kind of blood does it require?
 Blood of an unknown creature, most likely an animal.
 Of an unknown creature. But it's warm and living, which means the creature is living, too—and it's close!
 What kind of creature? A brontosaurus? A phoenix? Or, hmm, what else… An angel of God?
 I don't know. I'm looking for it!
 I think it's a bull. A special kind of bull. Call it intuition…
 Can your cure be reproduced chemically?
 Not in these conditions.
 Ask Dankovsky.
 Listen, Burakh. Am I saying it right? "Burakh"?\nOur unit has no medical personnel. We were sent here <i>butt naked.</i> I'll figure out later if it was insanity, negligence, or a premeditated crime… but right now, we need you to give us everything you have. Do I make myself clear?
 Crystal clear.
 I have a recipe for a serum. Based on traditional medicine, so to speak.
 Go on.
 It requires blood of an… unknown nature.
 I don't know where to get the raw material for it.
 Blood of previously-infected survivors?
 It leaves no survivors.
 Don't give me those tall tales… what was it… Burakh? Artemy Burakh, correct?
 Correct.
 How can we find the source of this blood?
 All blood seeps from Olonngo.
 I guess the Inquisitor could solve this problem.
 Inquisitors only ever solve their own problems, never anyone else's. Whatever they tell you, their real agendas are inscrutable. Don't let them fool you. They're just parasites, making others do their dirty work. The only well-being they care about is their own.\nAny more ideas?
 I have a sample.
 I'm a doctor, not an investigator.
 Just call me by my last name.
 One beats the bush, and <i>seven others</i> catch the bird…
 You no longer work in the hospital. Your only job is to find the raw material for the serum, in sufficient quantities to protect the Town. I don't need samples, or some proof-of-concept—I need a train car <i>full</i> of your cure.\nIf we don't find it in two days, I will have to bombard the Town. Those are my orders. Do I make myself clear?
 What?
 You're a general. Who could order… ah, never mind.
 Let them burn in hell! But orders are orders. We're military, Burakh. We don't debate orders.\nThe extreme lethality and unclear origin of your disease demands the full destruction of your town as a transport junction and settlement. We must create an exclusion zone. Do I make myself clear?
 Yes. I have a question…
 No.
 Dismissed.\nYou're under an obligation to report to the headquarters immediately if summoned, and to carry out any order I give you. The Army commissions you. For now, your goal is to find the missing serum component—in significant quantities.\nThat's it. You're free to go.
 I don't feel free…
 It was nice meeting the jewel of our military.
 If you ask so nicely… General Ashes.
 Even if you have found a source of raw material for your serum, it's too late now. We'll execute the order and leave for the front. That's it.
 So there will be a bombardment?
 So this is what you are like, General Ashes.
 Yes.
 But you'll have to fire anyway, right?
 If the target is designated, I'll have to.
 So there is nothing to discuss here.
 But you will fire in either case?
 How can she promise that?
 She can. I trust her. Are you here on business, or what?
 I am.
 What has she done to you? I can't believe my ears…
 Do you seriously believe I intend to discuss this with you? State your business and be done with it.
 I am here on the Inquisitor's behalf…
 In that case, I have something for you…
 The Inquisitor has done the calculations.
 And, Burakh? Wait a second.
 Waiting.
 It's all decided. What else is there to talk about?
 Come with us. We need an experienced doctor.
 Take Dankovsky.
 I thought about it. Thank you. I'll catch up with you after I finish my business here.
 Take Rubin. That's his cup of tea. He's a natural-born soldier.
 No.
 Are you and General Block…
 No.
 Then what? Are you trying to convert him?
 We <i>were</i> talking about the war. Criminal orders. History. Honor. Duty. Truth.\nNow we're talking about words. Will you <i>please</i> leave us alone?
 Are you… really a saint?
 Just… don't ever do that to me.
 I didn't know you knew those words.
 What do you know about the war? What can you tell him?
 Please. You're disturbing us.
 Fine. I guess I'll just count my blessings…
 Madness…
 …How the hell did we get into this? We've lost three-quarters of our troops in two days—General Ashes' troops!\nThere were five times fewer of us at the Fords, can you believe that? And just eleven killed in action. One hundred and eighteen wounded. Ashes has always protected his people. But here… all hell broke loose under us. Three quarters! That's six hundred people pushing daisies.
 Where's Ashes?
 It's not enough that the sand pest mows you down? You have to shoot each other, too?
 I'm healthy.
 Show me your hands.
 Take a look. I'm healthy.
 Calm down, officer. I'm a doctor too.
 Three steps back. Rear—march!
 Where's Block? I'm on an errand.
 …There a stone, looks like a bird's beak. That's where the fighting's moved to. Now, civilian! Three steps back—and—<i>march!</i>
 It's called Crowstone. And calm down, okay? Everything's gonna be fine.
 I'm the doctor. What do you want?
 A courier must have come here with papers for General Block…
 I want Block.
 I'm telling you, I'm healthy! I'm leaving anyway. Don't get jumpy…
 Another Burakh… Funny meatsacks, you. So many Burakhs around, these days.
 I am the only Burakh around.
 And who are <i>you?</i> Is the general here?
 I'm the general. General Asskicker, all right? You hear what I asked?
 I did.
 And?
 Burakh. Surgeon.
 I'm a doctor.
 Unfriendly, aren't you?
 Tired of living, boy?
 I'm not a boy. I'm a man.
 I'm Doctor Burakh.
 Hey, Stout, Splinter! Scrag the boy. No torture, just scrag 'em.
 Stop it! I'm a doctor.
 A doctor, huh?
 Burakh. Surgeon. Heard of me?
 So you're one of those gangs that roam around at night? Well, no need to waste words on you, then.
 Yeah. I'm here to fix your skulls, you assholes!
 Look over there, at the stage. See? That's a Burakh, too. He was running after the general with some papers, but his foot slipped. Now he's preparing for an operation. Gathering his thoughts.\nHere are my conditions. One of us got a bit punctured. A lovely soul, really—very dear to me. So whoever fixes him is Burakh in my book.
 Explain.
 Aren't you an educated man? Do I need to make myself even <i>more</i> clear?
 Yes.
 You'll extract the bullet. Don't worry about your gear, we got everything covered—leftovers from your predecessor. Then you'll patch the hole, he's got enough of 'em. Well, either you do it, or that clown will.\nIf our pal survives, you're free to drag your sorry asses to that general of yours. If he doesn't, you're both dog food. Food for dogs, Burakh.
 So he claimed to be Burakh?
 I guess he really wanted to survive. And since he did, now he owes us.
 Where's the wounded?
 I'm Burakh. I'll fix your pal.
 …Just like Grief's errand on the first day. Oh, Grief, and here I thought <i>you</i> were the bad guy.
 What?
 What did you say?
 …I'm just surprised.
 I said what I said. Stop trying to provoke me.
 You stupid? Is that what you're getting at?
 What do you want from me?
 Your attitude is clear. Say what you want.
 Oh, I'll <i>show</i> you the real Burakh, all right.
 No, I got it already. You just really want to have your teeth smashed in.
 Boil water. Lots of it.
 Get me all the bandages you can. Rip up all the cloth you can find to make more.
 Get me the longest set of tweezers from the bag.
 [He was shot in the stomach. That's bad news, he is almost a goner. The wounded is wearing a sweater and several shirts at once. Guess he was hoping the layers of cloth will protect him from sand pest.]
 [Wash my hands]
 [Sterilize my tools]
 [Get my hands on some alcohol, preferably not the drinking kind]
 [Cut off the clothing, it obstructs the wound]
 [The wound doesn't look good at all. A ricocheting rifle round, by the looks of it. But I feel like he has a chance.]
 [Wash the wound with water]
 [Clean the wound with alcohol]
 [Strap his torso with cloth, both above and below the wound]
 [Strap his torso below the wound]
 [Strap his ribs with cloth]
 [The patient's breath gets hoarse, he is gurgling and wheezing.]
 [Search the wound with tweezers. Gently now...]
 [Make a few incisions at the edge of the wound]
 [Calm the patient down. With my left hand, firmly immobilize his head]
 [It looks like the wound is less dangerous than it first seemed. The bullet didn't go in deep enough to do major damage. However, the wound is contaminated with pieces of dirty cloth.]
 [Time to drain the wound... With some cleaner cloth]
 [Shouldn't have done that! He is wheezing and struggling even harder. There is still a chance]
 Okay, buddy, calm down. We can get through this.
 Someone knock him out already! He's flailing around!
 [Gently pull the wound wider apart]
 [Quickly drain the blood with clumped bandages, it's impossible to see!]
 [Something hard inside.]
 [Something small. A bone fragment...? I don't think so, not in the stomach!]
 [Pull it out, whatever it is]
 [No time for dawdling]
 [Metal. That's the bullet. Come here, little thing...]
 [Pull it out sharply!]
 [Touch it with my finger]
 [Pull it out steadily]
 Stop gawking and pin his legs, you useless fucks!
 [It's... It's done. Clean the wound again, then apply bandages. Easy stuff.]
 He'll live.
 He's a survivor, that one.
 If he lives, I'd like to talk to him when he feels a little better.
 
 
 You have no business in the steppe, town flower. What are you? A daisy? A forget-me-not?
 A daisy, I guess… You must be a bitterroot.
 Why?
 Who are you, anyway?
 It's the same everywhere.
 Say... did you by any chance call to me? I sensed this strange prickling. Like you needed me...
 That's what I thought. But now I'm not so sure…
 Tell me… Is there anything you want from me? I had this odd <i>prickling</i> in my heart…
 Yes! You have such a sensitive heart. It never lies to you. You can hear! You can truly hear!\nI mean—I didn't call you on purpose. I can feel the Town, and touch it. It sings. And you hear its song too. You understand, don't you? It's a pulse. You've sensed it… Tell me, what was it like?
 It did feel like a pulse.
 I felt like someone was staring at my back.
 Like I got blackthorn stuck to my foot.
 Like intuition. "I am expected—I need to come." That's it.
 Anyway… something horrible is about to happen. And I can't do anything myself, no one would listen… not yet. That's why I thought of you, I guess… You're the only one who can take this seriously.\nIt's about Grace. She's all worn out, coming apart at the seams. And no one sees it, not even Grace herself. If no one helps her get a grip, I'm afraid she'll…
 Die?
 It's healthy to doubt.
 Get sick?
 Lose her gift?
 I'm not sure. I'm not that good a seer yet. But I know that if she comes unraveled now, that would be it. No one would be able to piece her back together.\nCan you pay her a visit? Can you help?
 Like I have a choice. Coming apart at the seams… sewing the unraveled back together is my thing.
 If I have the time.
 I think I know what this is about. The cemetery is overcrowded. "The dead are coming."
 <i>The beige thread has snapped.</i>
 I have to admit, this is the last thing I expected. I'm dead weight to her. I expected respect, or maybe <i>loathing,</i> but… she takes me for a useless dreamer. Assigned me to take care of the Town's corpses, instead of any other thing I could be doing!\nNo matter. Someone needs to do this job, too. A doctor can't shy away from dirty work.
 "She"? You mean the Inquisitor?
 What's wrong with our corpses?
 This isn't the first time you've had to manage the Town's business, oynon. You're good at it.
 Yes.
 What does she want you to do?
 You do that. It's… tough for her in the cemetery.
 …I wonder if <i>you're</i> the threat looming over her, emshen. Don't be rash. Let me talk to her.
 So that's why you come apart at the seams. Too many dead to console?
 Too many. All of them so cold… You don't believe me, do you? Go and listen! Go listen to those huge graves—they dump people there by the dozen!
 All right, sweetie. Just stop crying.
 I see what the issue is.
 You really can talk.
 Has Grace given me the power to hear you, somehow?
 ALL—CALL—ALL—COLD\nICY—I—SEE—I\nLACKING\nCLAD—IN—COLD
 …Is Isidor Burakh among you?
 I see. You are definitely cramped.
 Cold can be driven away… by fire.
 CALL—ONE—CALL—ALL\nALL—ONE\nALONE
 I'm sorry I asked.
 None of you are alone over there… You're all pretty cramped.
 You need warmth.
 What kind of thing are you?
 Not the kind from your league. My own kind of thing. It's you who barged into my domain, not the other way around, so show some respect and kiss the hem.
 Like hell I will.
 Your domain? Curious. Tell me, are there many dead people underground?
 Tell me what you want, human, or begone.
 I need the dead to stop smothering one another underground.
 I think I'd prefer the latter. I don't like your tone. Or the smell. Rotting meat…
 Are the dead truly uncomfortable down there? Or does it only seem that way to the living?
 You'll know when you're dead.
 How do I stop their screaming?
 How are you going to arrange that?
 Safe and sound. So? I'm not a town hall clerk, awaiting your orders…
 Cremation would destroy them. You… maybe not. Go ahead, work your magic.
 Do it. For Grace's safety.
 Forget it. I can sense that your plans are vile.
 Then we must burn them. There's no other way. Or they'll smother you.
 No! No burning! Then they won't be able to talk to us! The last thread will tear. Hope itself will dissolve. They'll be gone forever—can't you see?
 But they're already dead. They can't feel anything.
 Something has to be sacrificed. Better them than you.
 Saved your life, girl. The dead were tearing you apart.
 You didn't save anything. You don't understand.
 You're more important than corpses. Without you, who would console the future dead?
 You'll understand one day.
 Did you hear them? Did you?
 Yes.
 I sensed them.
 Do you understand now?
 I don't. How was I able to do that? You're the only one that can.
 I do. They're… different. Unlike anything else in the world.
 I do. They're cold, smothered, and in pain.
 They're unique. Not like us. They forget the simple, and learn the inexplicable.\nThey have their own tongue… like your people, the Kin. Not everyone understands the Kin—but then they don't go and burn you, do they!
 …That's a hell of a comparison.
 Well… I put a piece of thread in your pocket. Single-use.
 The thread worked. I've heard them.
 No. One must not burn the living.
 I mean… don't kill the living. Or the dead.\nSo forget my complaining, all right? It was just momentary… It hurts, but that's fine. They hurt more. Just don't do anything bad to them…
 I won't. I understand now. We'll let everything stay as it was.
 I won't touch the dead. But I'm not so sure about you.
 Look, it's not my idea. It's the Bachelor, and the Town Hall people. But this place is not good for you.
 Inquisitor's Orders
 A paper ordering the demolition of the Polyhedron, signed by Aglaya Lilich and sealed with the inquisitorial symbol.
 «430 38210 1497163528 879 38210 48396290 68222471613769175 18 1052717902 29165845946 38210 49870611 887 38210 41686371 1330178 1669402190247802342 34697687 388 38210 2608426264616807 10 2249484262227 81324246808634 68674986722284 10 1377214 1136413993 671 38210 46230147 36326011271 1068 410 1361552531131669 20331 24400 771812596 22752948989 1398842409238 13801 24400 1000269304941 1078862356 1547593502 724009 1147926313669…»\n\nThe whole paper is just uneven groups of numbers.
 Time is up. My delay made the choice for me.
 The udurgh is the Living Earth. Ancient aurochs return from the depths of time.
 A behemoth bunkhouse for the Bull Enterprise workers.
 State inquisitor Aglaya Lilich works here… accompanied by Bad Grief, for some reason.
 Loyalist
 Here's something stiffer.
 Officer
 Don't, then. I'm a yargachin myself. I'll survive. Do what must be done, and do it fast.
 What must be done?
 Where are you going?
 Upstairs. To find Overseer Tycheek.
 Don't worry about me. I belong to the Kin. I'm at home here.
 The concrete tomb of my people… and its protective shell.
 
 Got a smoke, man?
 Be careful around those soldiers. They can kick your ass. Absolutely demolished one of us already, for no good reason.
 No reason at all?
 Here, roll it yourself.
 I don't smoke.
 
 
 She's like a magician… Asked four questions, wrote down three letters. I have no idea what it meant, but I'm scared.
 I guess she hasn't broken you completely yet.
 Was it rough?
 Nothing ventured, nothing gained.
 There aren't many good or bad people in the world. Most people are just people.
 How did she find out about the theft? Ugh… It wasn't even a <i>real</i> theft! And I'll never do it again!
 Don't.
 Did she summon your children, too?
 What <i>does</i> she do to you all…
 I'm not a pretty dancer, so stop gawking. If you've got business, say it.
 I'm not here for you. I dropped by to see your chemist, but he's not around. So I've got no one else to gawk at.
 Will there be a barrage? What do we do? The infection may pass, but this… So many cannons… Does this mean they're planning a strike?
 They won't fire if we make a cure.
 Well, he only wanted to have a look at his rifle. And help himself to his flask… Barely got out of there alive.
 Don't take chances with the military.
 Something's wrong at Anna's.
 Don't pester soldiers. You're asking for trouble.
 Bite your tongue, li'l bird. Off, preferably. I'm buying! Hahaha…
 So what happened to the chemist?
 I don't know. I'm not the one informing on people. You tell me what happened to the chemist! Only, I don't care.
 Did you just call me a snitch?
 Not selling it.
 Was the chemist arrested?
 His actions threatened us all! Don't you see?
 Oh, don't mind me. Want to know where he is? Ask the people that took him. I know nothing. And if I did, I wouldn't tell a mole. So off you go to your li'l hole. I'm busy.
 No. Asking those people is pointless.
 How do you know it was me?
 You're one sleazy person.
 You're taking your sweet time making that cure! But what about us? What do we do?
 Wait.
 Believe.
 Stay indoors and wash your hands.
 At least we get to choose now.
 Choose what?
 How to die. We had Plague and Famine before, but now there's War.
 Forget it. It was an unfunny joke.
 
 
 
 Stop being silly, akhar. Why do you ask when you cannot comprehend the answer? You know not how our world works. You cannot cut Bos Turokh open.\nThen again, it's not just you. One needs to see it with their very eyes… words fail to convey it.
 So what do we do?
 It's not that simple… I'll gather the people, open the entrance. But it takes time. We'll figure out how the blood streams from there.\nWho could have thought… the Ear bleeds. Shekhen bleeds… This is odd. Was there much blood here?
 Too little to cure everyone.
 I'd like to see it!
 Who are you calling "akhar"? Mind your place, odongh!
 What do you want, Kindred? Tell me. What drives you on this Earth?
 Honestly? I don't give a damn about this outbreak. I just want to know who killed my father—and get vengeance.
 I trust you, somehow… and I desperately need advice. Father left me a debt, an obligation. A list of people in danger. There were a bunch of kids… and one "udurgh." Do you know what it means?
 I have to take Father's place. But I still don't have any idea what it means exactly. Who <i>was</i> he? Who am I to become? What does it mean for me…?
 Nothing. I don't belong to this town. I'd leave if I could.
 The Kin are a beast of one heart and many heads… and that beast does not yet acknowledge your mastery. No one would take your questions seriously yet.
 Sahba would.
 Why not? They clearly treat me with respect.
 Depends on how I ask.
 No. You are an outsider to them.\nMaybe Tycheek would take you seriously… but I doubt even that. And the people… to them, you are no one, khayaala.
 I'll talk to Tycheek, then.
 The feeling that Capella wants to talk is gone. I guess I've done something without her help…
 Prompter
 Why are you here? I don't understand. They won't let you in, anyway. You know this, and yet you came.
 Why are <i>you</i> here? I thought you didn't like the Polyhedron.
 Ah, there you are. Time for our first rehearsal! \nThis is all very emotional, but don't get anxious. It's just a study, not a full play yet. So take your time and get into character.
 A rehearsal? What's going on?
 Don't worry about us. Not many children are here so far, but more are coming—everyone who's healthy.\nThe Rose will protect us from the plague.
 The Bridge Square is infected! And yet you cross it on foot…
 There's infection below. That's why we're standing here waiting. The signs appear quickly. That's what the Bachelor told me.\nThis staircase is the best isolation ward available. We'll spend the night here. The sick will descend. Whoever remains on the staircase by the morning will go inside.
 What if there's a bombardment? Have you seen the cannon they've brought in…?
 Let me through. I want to talk to the others.
 Don't. For whatever reason, they love you. Send you all the hellos in the world.\nYou—don't breathe on them. You're the one who came from the square. Go back down. And don't return until this is all over.
 Yeah, you're right.
 Tell them I love them, too. And I do know why.
 Rehearsals are boring. I prefer to learn by doing.
 We'll have a run-through of a small part of our play. Remember: your time is limited! At two past noon the theater will close and we'll have to part ways. So you won't be able to finish your script anyway.\nDo not despair. It's intentional.
 What do I need to do?
 Take this time to study the space and objects, warm up your vocal cords... and generally prepare for the big show.\nAnd mind the time! The stage is yours until two o'clock. Now off you go. The clock is ticking!
 As if it wasn't before...
 You're have your rehearsal, funny man, but I have business to do. Actual business...
 Warm up my vocal cords, huh? I can do that.
 So? Does anyone now care what you love and what you hate?
 …Fair enough. All that matters is figuring out where the strange blood came from.
 Nota
 We called and called, but you didn't hear us…
 Why aren't you home? Can't you see what this district is like?
 You look like a goof-ball... is that intentional too?
 I am your successor.
 I don't get it.
 It's not. You look nothing like me.
 I'm talking about myself. The resemblance is striking. It's like I'm the real thing.
 <i>I'm</i> the real thing.
 What are you doing here?
 I was looking for the courier. Same as you. Today is the day, in which the Haruspex looks for the courier.
 So, is he here?
 My stage directions went like this: "Today, the Haruspex looks for the courier." Burakh tries to ambush him, so that he doesn't deliver orders to the general. \nSo I tried to kill him, and failed.
 Where. Is. The courier?
 Who are you, man? Why do you call yourself Burakh?
 I don't <i>want</i> a successor. I'm not over yet.
 Huh… I see. Well, hello, Artemy Burakh.
 We can talk about <i>that.</i>
 Why argue? I only need to wink to those guys over there, and they'll cut you to pieces.
 Then explain. And keep it brief.
 Paid in advance… and here I am, working for free.
 Leave me be, human. I'll be of use to you yet. I stand between you and Death, as your successor.
 Fair enough…
 The thing is, I don't <i>like</i> you. Your performance is terrible. I'm completely different.
 Are you sure? Who knows. It never hurts to take a good look at yourself.
 Even your speech patterns are different!
 I'm sure.
 I succeed you. Don't hurt me, human. I'm your mirror. Don't kill me. I'm your guide to immortality. As you die, I'll succeed you.
 What?
 I don't want this. I'll manage on my own.
 Fate.
 Blah blah.
 All right. Let's play at fate, then. Where's the courier?
 Your directions were misleading. That's not what I'm planning to do.
 I think I'm starting to understand… Fine. Succeed me. I wonder how it'll end.
 <i>I'll</i> be the one to succeed <i>you.</i> And now I'm off to find the courier.
 Great job shifting the guilt.
 Your arms ought to be torn from their sockets. You're an impostor—if only because I still live!
 I don't need a <i>successor.</i> Don't replace, duplicate, or cover for me. I'm the only person named Artemy Burakh, the only one with his burden. You're not <i>here.</i>
 You need her blood. If you let blood out of Earth, Mother Boddho will die. Is that what you want? Boleesh, boleesh, byy alysh…
 I can't help it. This sacrifice must be made.
 If Mother Boddho dies, so do we. Zobolon, boozarlakhaa. It hurts! It frightens us. So few remain. It is not so terrible to die, but what about losing something for all time?
 I pity you. Pity the weak and the doomed. It's a pity when the last aurochs goes extinct…
 What are you talking about?
 Waiting for you. Waiting for you. Tell us, tell us now: Will you fulfill your duty?
 Sayn baina, Khatanghe. What do you want to tell me?
 …I've heard these words before. What duty is it now?
 Who are you, bizarre creatures…?
 We are made of Earth. Mother Boddho feeds us living blood. Suok watches us from the depths.
 Like shabnak-adyg…
 I thought this was just a dream.
 Your words were for your father, then. Now, speak for your mother. Mother Boddho, Earth, awaits you.
 What is she waiting for?
 Bite kharan, ubshe stands at our doorstep. A big loss. All that remains of us is here, before you.
 What do you fear?
 I know. There are few of you left.
 I'm not sorry for you.
 But… I'm nobody.
 Take pity on us.
 Why me? You are doomed. You are the past. You will inevitably die, ground down by time.
 Be khara, emshen chooses words carefully. Who is to judge him? But, but, take pity on us.
 What do you want from me?
 That's the opposite of what I want.
 Earth is killing us. Mother Boddho devours her children. She disgorged this horrible plague, so her blood will erase it. All is connected. All is as it should be.
 I really need that blood.
 This is beyond me. I'm a doctor, responsible for the Town. It is in agony, but something can still be saved.
 I pity you. I truly pity you.
 Beshe, I refuse. I cannot do it your way.
 Before the eyes of Kin and Earth, this I say: I, son of Mother Boddho, will not harm her. The Sky is my witness.
 Then this is our goodbye. Bayatay, emshen. Bayatay, essegher. Bayatay, kholboön. Bayatay, khayaala.
 Bayatay, Khatanghe. Oshysh daa. Go.
 Go. I still have time to think.
 Don't worry. I've changed my mind. I… I'll never betray you.
 Earth bore this terrible plague.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 What do you mean, equal? Ugh…
 Learned that little speech by heart, did you?
 I'm a doctor. You know what they say: "Everyone's on their own, and only God is on everyone's side."
 
 
 
 
 I don't care about Lara.
 Why were you calling?
 We saw you walk into the Cathedral. So we started shouting…
 Who's "we"?
 There, in the Tower. Or <i>on</i> the Tower, really. The air is clean there, and the disease can't touch it because it's barely connected to the ground. We're up high.\nGathering there slowly, all of us. We're gonna go inside it <i>completely.</i> And then the plague won't ever touch us.
 So you all crossed an infected district? What have I done to deserve this…?
 Apologies for the mishap.\nThe times we live in… are growing shorter, did you notice? Minutes have become shorter; hours, less productive. I guess the Cathedral is broken… Don't get angry.\nBut enough small talk. Or would you like to stay on duty a while longer?
 If I must.
 Not today. My shift is over.
 It's not allowed, anyway. If it's our duty now, that means it's our duty indeed. Take a stroll while you still can, doctor; you're free until tomorrow.\nOrderly number eleven, reporting in.
 While I "still can"? Sounds like a threat.
 Good luck with your shift, orderly.
 Are you on our side? Or are you with the mutineers?
 What's wrong with you all? Now isn't the time for mutinies!
 You the one who threw a bunch of rocks and dirt at me yesterday? 
 No.
 This is all a farce. General Block never came here. He's at the front, he's always been at the front, I'm telling you.
 People have seen him. Here, in the Town Hall.
 Where did they take the children? Where, I ask you? They're just going to grind them down to make more soldiers.
 They certainly didn't take them to a playground.
 Mark Immortell
 To a larger town, I suppose. Probably Nizhny or Relsk.
 The General contracted sand pest, I've heard. So there's no command at all—everyone's just shooting one another. Complete anarchy!\nIf it's true, who gave the order about the children? I'm scared…
 It was his order. He seems like the type to protect people.
 Those are lies, spread around so that any idiot could give out orders like they'd received them from the great hero General Block. Why would he ever come to our hellhole? We don't deserve the honor.
 Stranger things have happened.
 This isn't a hellhole anymore. It's just hell.
 Deserters.
 Then fight your deserters. You're burning people alive!
 Makes sense.
 Yes, to stop the spread of miasma… They're already dead, anyway. No one survives this pest of yours. \nSeriously, get lost! Worry about your own skin, not lecturing people.
 There's no miasma!
 Fuck you, too.
 Do I look like a kid flinging dirt around?
 Did they hurt your eye? Let me check…
 We got enough grief from the locals, but now our own people shoot us in the back! Lost their minds with fear. Idiots…
 You should have thrown trash back at them.
 All that military discipline broke down, huh? Is it every man for himself?
 You don't see it yourself?
 You all should leave. You didn't restore order. Just made things worse.
 Some wisdom: Wash your eyes well from the soil, or you'll weep pus.
 Don't you see I'm a civilian?
 
 
 
 
 Little Artemy. I remember the first time I held you in my palm… the first time I carried you on my shoulder. I taught you not to fear bulls.\nI do not know if it was any use to either of us. Perhaps it was to me. 
 You're Father's friend. Or used to be…
 Did you know that Father's been murdered?
 The Lines led me…
 Don't call me "Kindred." I've hated it since my childhood.
 This is the blood of an unusual creature. Half bull, half man. Looking at you made me think of it…
 Is this the udurgh's blood? What is it, anyway?
 A decent amount.
 They're not my people.
 What? Tycheek is dead…?
 Are you surprised?
 No… but that's one more tether snapped. Yet again I find myself with questions no one can answer…
 I guess the only hope left is that his daughter can replace him…
 That place is abandoned and uninhabitable.
 It won't work. They'll let you out of this stone tomb, but not the Town… due to the quarantine.
 Then take that qua-rat-thing away!
 I don't think I can. But I can get <i>you</i> out.
 No, there's ten! You've got ten fingers on your hands.
 That's not how it works…
 Lesson one… Oyun was right. I don't understand you anymore.
 We want justice. All must be fair. All must follow the Lines. He who has done this to us must come and observe the consequences of his actions.\nWe will not leave until this is done.
 And what do you plan to do? Kill him?
 The one who oppresses us. The one who locked us in. The Master. The owner. Fat Boös Vlad.
 We'll convince him. I know a magic word.
 He's only your master as long as you consent to be his people.
 He locked us in. His order destroyed our people. He turned the Warren into a coffin, an үkhedel. Tiimel daa, it is so.
 So what? Are you planning to stay in this coffin out of sheer stubbornness?
 What if it wasn't him?
 Mob justice, then?
 I won't do it.
 Ime beshe, he has no power over you. Go. You owe him nothing.
 You're right…
 Here, connections must be made.\n\nI must find, tame, and bind three parts of a whole, together on a sacrificial table by the Pit.
 Oh… You can find toolkits in shops. But rarely. But it's doable. But I don't think anyone's selling one now. But if I see one, I'll let you know.
 I know where to find toolkits. I wasn't born yesterday.
 Hm. Well, I haven't seen a single toolkit anywhere over these past few days. So if you find one, let me know.
 I'll find one myself… at some point.
 No. We can't leave yet.
 That's up to you. But I'm taking the girl.
 Who's in charge here now? Who do I talk to?
 How fares your kine, Khatangher? Did you hear what Mother told you?
 Poorly. But the Termitary is open. You're free to go.
 I am Isidor Burakh's son. I want to find out his fate. Tell me what you know.
 The doors are open. What's holding you here?
 Tycheek's daughter, Mother, is his successor. Be khara, you talked to her. Now you talk to us.
 Yes, but who makes decisions?
 The Kin. Mother is still young. She can't make decisions. \nWe sense each other's needs. When the Khatanghe are united, when all want the same, there's no need to decide. Everything is resolved on its own.
 I see…
 Huh… Father did tell me that the Kin are like a pack of beasts, with a single mind and sense… but I thought he was exaggerating.
 Be khara, you are stubborn.
 Ene shi yuun khun geeshebshe? What kind of person are you? Why would we talk to you? Why would we care what you want? We only care what the Kin want.
 The Kin want me to take Tycheek's daughter. I'll take good care of her.
 I hope the Kin want to leave this rotten place. I've made it possible. You're free to go.
 What are we going to do now?
 What we do best: work.
 I <i>will</i> try to achieve what I wanted. Revive and reform the Bull Enterprise. Now that there's nothing more to lose—and nothing is on the line—I can be more daring.
 We'll see about that.
 I don't know. Never thought about it.
 "We"? You and I have different paths.
 Everything is always on the Lines. Don't you forget that.
 I could tear anyone's throat out… Anyone… but now…\nLook at me, Master Burakh… A colossus with feet of clay. Heh heh… standing here, imagining my end. I still need to finish… with dignity…
 Are you thinking about death?
 That's what I think. People say… a life for a life… I took the Kin's life, but I never gave up mine…
 People say right.
 You robbed yourself.
 You're not alone yet. You have people who can take care of you.
 Dignity. That's a good word.
 I've got nothing to tell you.
 The town is dying—yet the Kin live. Perhaps this means it's the Kin's time. They'll burst from the Termitary, and take what is theirs. Sabha spoke of that. Sahba-ötün. Sahba Usp'tae. Aspity. Do you know her?
 What can you know of the Lines, child?
 Blood seeps from underground in this place. Do you know where it comes from?
 Why can't anyone get in?
 Because there is a plague. Because there is no one here to lead the bulls from the steppe through the Gates of Labor.\nDo not flaunt your ignorance, akhar. Incredible… Isidor's son is back, and knows not how the Ford works… Shudkher!
 I know that "olonngo" means "ford." Enough for me.
 You have an odd pattern of speech… not that many steppe words. Are you humoring me? There's no need—I know our tongue. Ukherney ereed baina gүү.
 I need to understand what sort of blood it is. Can you tell me?
 Let me think…
 You look…bad. Could you possibly be infected too?
 Go ahead. I'll wait.
 Well, I can see you're frank. Even if you are broken, you were Father's friend.
 Be quiet. You don't know what kind of person I am.
 I'm just trying to find my own path. Father used to be so confident…
 Likewise. I'm not Father. I'm different. Sorry to disappoint.
 I am no one. The Kin's fingernail. A fleck of their skin. What can I do?\nYour questions, your words… must be addressed to the Kin. But one must learn to talk to them. And you don't have the skill.
 That's why I'm talking to you.
 I'm part of the Kin, too. Their fingernail; a fleck of their skin.
 How <i>does</i> one talk to the Kin? Even Father couldn't.
 This is… difficult to explain. Instead you should see. You'll need to come with me—to the Abattoir.
 Then let's go! You're the Foreman of the Abattoir—who's gonna stop you?
 Where the hell have you been, Foreman of the Abattoir?
 So…the blood was collected here? I didn't know. Truthfully, it was my friend who made the cure… Father's student. Stakh Rubin.
 Kindred. You won't understand even if I tell you. As if I spoke a foreign language.\nYou have no udhar—no warm vessel—to hold my answer. You're armless for now. I'd give you an answer, but it'd fall to the ground.
 Armless? Wow. No one's ever called me <i>that.</i>
 And you call yourself Father's friend…
 What results?
 The son killed several thousand people. And he knows it. He was the one who locked up the Termitary.
 What do you mean…?
 I mean what I said. He's the one who did it. On the night of your arrival.
 …
 …Why?
 What makes you think we're the ones making these choices?
 Who else?
 The Olgimskys themselves.
 Fair enough.
 Very funny.
 Yeah, I'm in stitches.
 So what do we do…?
 I wish they'd both rot. Bloodsuckers, both of them, each in their own way.
 You're good at guilt-tripping people, girl saint.
 Why would you say that? I'm a good person—a <i>good person!</i>
 I'll talk to Young Vlad myself. And talk him out of it.
 You've been there.
 I have.
 Do you realize what you've done? You, and all the Olgimskys!
 A riot among the Kin? What the fuck do you mean? They've been struggling under your yoke for sixty years, and they never lifted a finger!
 Stop yelling at me! That's just what I've been told! Can you imagine what Father would have done if he'd learned about a strike—not to mention a riot?!
 Yeah… I can.
 What—you think he'd have gunned down a protest? Saburov wouldn't have let him! We didn't even have weapons.
 No one could have known about it… Indeed.
 Don't go. You can't fix this.
 You fucking murderer… Do you even realize what you've done, you monster?
 This is a brave decision. Go. Look them in the eye.
 I can guess, my boy… I can guess… If everything there was all right, you wouldn't barge in here with your eyes so wide…\nHow many…?
 How many what?
 All of them, as far as you are concerned.
 What?
 He's going to them. To us. What don't you understand?
 You have come. The body is whole now.
 Were you talking?
 
 Thrush
 Measly
 
 
 The Army's in town. Artillery. Alexander Block, a legendary general, the hero of our disgraceful war.\n\nThey've set up their headquarters in the Town Hall.
 My scouts reported that you blacked out in the Town. I came here to check on you.\nYou look better than you did two minutes ago. Have you taken the immunity boosters?
 Your scout is a bit too young. I don't like it.
 
 
 She told me to report daily. So I will. Strange. Such a beautiful Line, even if misplaced.
 Time to see Aglaya.
 Time to see Aglaya again.
 <i>The sound of paper crushed and thrown away. She's not calling, but you should come. Right now. She needs you.</i>
 Burakh—get out. Just get out. Am I making myself clear?\nBut thank you for the rehearsal. I've looked one of you in the eyes now. And I must bear… however many there are. I hope there's plenty.
 Fine. If you refuse to listen, I'll find another way to stop you.
 There's four hundred or so…
 Your son is on his way there. He'll do the counting.
 So you do care about your son, after all?
 What…?\nDon't you dare try to pry into my soul! This is my son. This is my sin. We'll figure things out on our own, he and I… No assistance required. Get lost.
 Wait any longer, and you won't have a son at all. Because he's going to them.
 Look them in the eyes, boös. Gaze into the eyes of your remaining workers.
  Tomorrow my workers will go and labour. Their job is to butcher bulls and not to have staring contests, master Burakh.
  In that case, someone else will meet their gaze, master Olgimsky.
 I don't suppose I'll ever find out what Rubin had made his cure from. But strange blood seeps from the ground "by the Ear."\n\nShekhen. The Ear is in Shekhen.
 
 The blood is in the Abattoir. Foreman Oyun will let me in. But it'll take time. I'll have to wait.
 The Termitary has been devoured by the disease. Tycheek is dead. The Kin have truly become orphaned.\n\n…What does this mean for me?
 
 The Kin's body is whole. The survivors have left for Shekhen.
 How fares your kine, esegher?
 How fares your kine, Khatanghe? Is everything all right?
 I've seen my people's true face. Now is the time to teach them to see one another.
 You know what? The Khatanghe are baking me oatmeal talh. I demanded it sweet! I'll share with you too, if you come to live with us.
 No. But I'll come to visit.
 The Kin are free.
 
 
 You do look like a healthy lad.
 Yeah. You were lying down, not moving at all. Like a corpse…
 A spot-on description of my overall condition.
 Oh, I see a purse walking in? Or are you here to bust me?\nDon't you try anything funny! I'm the only one left selling food for coin now. You won't find a second merchant like me in the whole Town!
 Huh? What do you mean?
 Secretary
 Here to get coupons?
 What coupons?
 Here to get coupons?
 Yes.
 
 
 Aglaya is busy. Now is not the time to see her.
 Grocery
 Pharmacy
 Are you their leader, Notkin?
 It's dangerous to just lie down in the streets here, especially if you're still alive. Our scouts were brave to use their medicine dragging you out.\nStill, we need to talk about this.
 Let's talk, then.
 I gave them an order to not assist any more infected people. Unless it's one of ours.
 Why?
 The last thing I want is for you to play medical personnel! We have orderlies—the beakheads. No beak, no business in infected districts!
 Are you afraid of infection? You lurk in those districts anyway, making that map of yours…
 It's one thing to walk the streets, another to touch the sick. You know the difference.
 And neither of those is your business!
 We're low on immunity boosters, and we're entirely out of shmowders.\nWhat I mean is, be careful. If you fall in the street again, we can't help.
 I won't fall.
 I can't believe my ears. Could it be that at least one of my pleas got through to you?
 Thank heavens!
 Quite so.
 Any chance you might have seen the hunger and ruin going around? It's called "emergency conditions."\nTo help you maintain a semblance of life, our kind benefactor, Inquisitor Aglaya Lilich, introduced centralized distribution of food in exchange for coupons. It's called "rationing due to low stock."
 Centralized distribution? One piece of toast per person?
 Don't offer money to the merchants. We've got ears everywhere. You'll get whatever the Inquisitor decides you're worthy of. It's called "basic provisions."\nSo are you taking the coupons or not?
 Sure.
 Keep them. I'll find sane merchants.
 Well done learning all those long words. What do I do with money now?
 No, just to chat.
 You still take money? That's useful. Think you'll stay in business long?
 Long enough if you turn your pockets out. It's not like the candy wrapper lady is here forever. It'll all calm down in a week, or sooner if someone puts her in a box. I'll have a whole vault of wealth by then.\nSo? What will it be? Gawking or trading?
 You're a sly one. Show me your goods.
 Think we've only got a week left?
 Ugh, clueless sod.\nThe big-city wench forbade coin. Now it's all about those coupons. Try to survive just eating whatever you can trade for her candy wrappers. Oh, and share it all with everyone else! A dictator, she is.
 But you're still selling food, against her law? Bold. Think you'll keep this business running long?
 
 
 I've protected everyone I could, as much as I could.
 A schism grew among us. Because of you, emshen. We can't go anywhere split.\nWe are a single body. We cannot leave a limb behind. It will not let us grow into a new life. Remember what Mother told you about fingers? 
 A schism? Really?
 Because of <i>me?</i> How?
 Once again, I've barely arrived in a place before I'm considered guilty.
 No. Nothing to be happy about…
 I guess I am.
 I'll lead them away from here. Perhaps you'll still have a chance.
 I don't know.
 What's going to happen next?
 What can I do for you now?
 Nothing. It is done already.
 Fine.
 Cheer up. I'll lead them away from here soon. That's why I brought you here in the first place…
 In the end, you would have become just like your father. As long as they slaved away for you, everything would have stayed the same.
 And put their elders on the town council?
 The Tower is connected to the source of the outbreak, Burakh.
 A strange conclusion. Do you have proof?
 Look for the source of the blood. I've made some progress on this matter.
 Report.
 Oyun, the Foreman of the Abattoir, is back from the steppe. He might know something.
 Your Oyun knows nothing. He tried to find those… brontosauruses of yours in the steppe, only to learn they're extinct. Any more bright ideas?
 I need to go to the Abattoir. I've always wanted to.
 I think I should look into the Abattoir…
 Do you know what you'd be looking for? Or is it just a shot in the dark?
 A shot in the dark.
 I'm relying on Oyun. He promised to find out…
 We have no time for hope and luck, Burakh! No time at all!
 I'm not the inquisitor here! I'm doing my best.
 I know.
 I don't know…
 You're the inquisitor. Not me.
 And what should I do about it?
 Also, the Khatanghe are making me a necklace from chuulu and berry stones. Davuu erh, only I am allowed to wear that!
 You're the prettiest here, anyway.
 Also, the Khatanghe are stuffing pillows for me! I want a pillow takh! And they're carving a wooden step, so I could sit higher than anyone, softer than anyone, and prettier than anyone! Tiimel daa!
 Wow! So where will your Not-So-Highness reside?
 Let someone else worry about what the source was… I'm more interested in curing this pest.
 Imagine an arm torn from a body. Hanging by loose skin, unattachable. One can't cut his own arm off, either. Too painful, lacking will.\nSo a yargachin is needed to cut it. It will hurt, yes. Will be terrible. But someone has to do it. You know the Lines? So trace them.
 I know many Lines. A wise man follows his own—not the shortest.
 I'll need a weapon.
 Connected? How?
 But you can't cure it. You have nothing from which to make your panacea. Therefore, we must at least purge the source, so we can prevent this catastrophe from ever repeating. Wouldn't you agree?
 Apples and oranges. It's just a building! What does it have to do with the disease?
 I hope you know what you're doing.
 The Olgimskys have no power anymore. They locked up the Termitary. The culprit will be judged.
 The justice of the Kin is swift and terrible.
 Well… no one tore them to pieces when I was there.
 That's because you were there.
 …Think I should go back? Interfere in some way?
 They deserve it.
 I know. I want them to leave too.
 They'll just look their former owners in the eye.
 Same thing. Don't you know how the Kin does its eye-touch?
 No.
 I can guess…
 You will have to prove your strength to the Kin. Prove that not only do you know the Lines, Kindred, but that you can also trace them with your knife. Prove you're a yargachin like your father, too.\nThey won't listen to you until you do. And they won't accept your help. You are still no one.
 That's what they said.
 I don't want to follow the path of strength. Father didn't.
 Because I was there to help him! Because the Olgimskys forced them into submission, and I—their watchdog—sacrificed my <i>name</i> to drag them by the yoke wherever they'd be fed!\nOur people only understand strength. Strength alone! They don't think. They don't fear death. They need to be dragged from its door—by the yoke!
 You're talking like a yoke's part of the body. It isn't. It can be removed.
 And?
 And I agree. I'll accept authority over them if I have to.
 I don't want power. Father led by example. As a teacher. He never gave orders…
 No, Khatangher, I'm not convinced. There's an untruth… a false Line, if you will.
 What can bind you to them that is stronger than blood? Such is blood's main quality: it binds. Binds people. Binds organs. Binds the world.
 I guess, but…
 They made me drag out Olgimsky for them to tear apart.
 Which one?
 Who cares? But the Bull Enterprise is no more.
 The son.
 The father.
 As if a deed can't be bloodless.
 Blood isn't the only thing that binds.
 What do they want from you right now? Why won't they leave that tomb?
 They want me to kill those who reject communal thought.
 They're acting stupid. If they want to die, let them. Cutting off the nose to spite the face…
 So kill them.
 Easier said than done…
 Are you afraid to taint yourself with blood? You're a yargachin! It's not your place to fear blood.
 Yes, I'm afraid.
 We won't ever speak the common tongue. You only have the one word for surgeons and butchers, Khatangher! Can't you see the difference between a murder and an amputation?
 No, I can't. You shouldn't, either.
 I have a conscience.
 It's not that. I hate being forced into things. You're pushing me. And so are they. You can all go to hell.
 They're living beings, not cells in one body! Each has a soul. A face, a voice, a self. 
 You are wrong, Kindred. You're whining like a child, wavering for no reason.\nDo what they want! They don't <i>care.</i> We, the Khatanghe, do not feel death—only life. And life means <i>unity,</i> the collective, to us. Kill the few who stand apart to spare the rest! Pay that price. And then teach the Kin your truth, and lead them wherever you please.
 Fine. I guess you're right. "Few" is an understatement, though… I'll need a weapon.
 I'll find another way. I will. My knife will trace a different Line.
 I'll think about it.
 You tell me. But I've found my own way.
 Be khara, that was truly a powerful deed. Medengshe, you have made some of us rethink our ideas.
 Really? Well, then it really was an achievement.
 I'm glad you understand. Now go back to Shekhen.
 
 
 
 I haven't been to the river yet.
 Running late? Forgetting the script?\nThat's fine. <i>I've</i> been there. I succeed you. Today is the day in which the Haruspex looks for the courier.
 I'm not <i>forgetting the script!</i> I made a choice. I <i>chose</i> to come here first!
 How can you "succeed" me if we're both here at the same time?
 You made a choice. Yes. Choice is a connection, too. Existence and nonexistence go hand in hand. It doesn't matter if you went left or right; what matters is that you've been to the crossroads.\nYou chose to choose.
 I chose a different path than you. That means we're different.
 I thought I was a Mistress… That it was my destiny to defeat this plague… but it turned out differently.\nI guess this is goodbye, Artemy.
 No way in hell. First, there's nothing good about any of this. Second, I won't give up on you. I'll help you.
 Ah, Burakh. You are the only doctor who comes as he pleases, before a patient calls.
 You're not a stranger to me, you know.
  
  
 My throat is all dry… Everything is dry. I'd like a drink of water. But… no. No more water for me.
 I know what that feels like, kiddo. I've experienced it too.
 I sent Jester away. He kept trying to get close to me, silly cat. I told him to stay in the corner! He could catch it too…
 I still can't see him… your familiar.
  
  
 .....
 You're all too independent! Scattered around like a bunch of cubs... Do you know where Grace is now?
  
  
 Bayarlaa… My kine fares poorly. 
  
  
 We'll shoot her today! That's the order. She can't run from a bullet.
 Shoot whom?
 Did you hear? They shot that inquisitor woman down.
 What? Why?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Whose order?
 
 
 He caught it while evacuating everyone under the age of sixteen.
 What do you think you're doing?!
 The door is over there, doctor.
 I don't like this at all. Does the commissar, Aglaya Lilich, know about this?
 Over. There.
 I'm not one of your junior officers… lieutenant.
 You people are dousing fire with kerosene.
 Wounded Bandit
 What do you want?
 I do.
 Our kids are <i>gone.</i> They won't ever return. I can tell.
 You the one the kids call Cub?
 Sure. What do you want?
 Have a drink, pal. Drunks will be safe.
 No, it just feels that way to you. Liquid courage.
 No, I don't. It's not that simple. I still have some time to think.
 I won't.
 Don't push it!
 You are mistaken, oynon. There's dissent among the soldiers. If the orders are not delivered, there will be no bombardment at all.
 So there won't be.
 We'll see about that.
 But killing a person…
 Why must you always intrude upon children? You don't belong here.
 You must be confused. We're not in the Polyhedron.
 Hey uncle, are the Dogheads done for? Or is there a mutiny?
 I don't know. What makes you think so?
 Caspar Kain moved to the Nutshell? What in the world has compelled him to leave the Polyhedron?
 Caspar Kain lives here—temporarily. His leaderless kingdom of children remains in the Polyhedron.
 ....
 Back now? Good boy… Have you brought me anything?
 ....
 You've got a thousand-yard stare… Must have seen a lot of shit.
 Ukherney ereed baina gyy?
 Medene ugye, kharaa ugyb… I don't know, I haven't seen them…
 Oral disinfectant doesn't work. You're better off washing your hands.
 So it is you, then. My daughter wanted me to relay something to you… before they took her away.
 Did it have anything to do with time and fate?
 She wanted me to give you a note. Said you'd be in "big trouble," otherwise. Now, where I'd put it… in a pocket… a small piece…
 Oh, this is definitely about fate.
 Not just Cub. When they want me to play a game with them, they call me uncle. Also when they tell me I'm bad at the game.
 Medehegshe, your father led the Kin the wrong way. He wanted us to dissolve in the Town.\nWe want to dissolve in Earth, our Mother Boddho. Dissolving in her belly, we will return. Dissolving in the Town, we will fade forever. It will devour us.
 Father was wise. The time of the Kin is at an end. As a rare branch to a seedling, so must we graft the Kin to the Town. That's your only chance to save anything at all.
 Baygalday, Khatanghe. I will leave. But first, I want to talk to you—instead of killing.
 Better kill us. We don't want to follow the Line of Burakh.
 What do you mean, Khatangher?
 Father didn't lead. He didn't drag you anywhere. He just took care of you.
 I will lead you differently.
 Be khara, you are truly your father's son. Hence, we don't need you.
 I am Father's son, and I will continue his Line. But that doesn't mean I'll trace it the same way he did.
 You think you know the Lines, kholboön?
 Be oylgono ugyb… Which way would you lead us? How would you make the cut?
 I came to connect, instead of cutting. Father tore old connections apart. The Town and the Kin were sewn together wrong. The Town of Men was sewn to the new Town of Children on the other side—poorly, against the guidance of the Lines. That made everyone suffer. You're too different. Our worlds are too different.
 You speak wisely, emshen. What do you want to do about it?
 Our bones have intergrown all wrong. The Town was killing itself. That's why the sand plague keeps coming back. So Father broke those bones.
 No. I'm different. I'm not Father's reflection.
 I spoke with Father. I realize now what he wanted.
 When a fracture fuses wrong, doctors break the bone again and put on a splint—to fuse it right. To cure lameness, to let the patient walk again.
 You are a yargachin.
 If I make those new connections, blood will flow again through our common body.
 I'll tell you the truth: I don't know yet. I only know that I will connect what Father has torn apart. My Lines aren't cuts, but connections. Veins. Nerves. Tissue.
 So many different living creatures inhabit our small patch of land. Alive, all of them. All connected with the same flow… A tohonto, an umbilical cord.
 So you acknowledge me?
 Do you promise to do so?
 No. I can't. Empty promises are worthless. But I'll try. And if I fail, my son will continue after me. This is what connections are all about.
 I do.
 Fine. We're curious to see. But woe to you or your successor if you fail.
 If I fail, woe to us all.
 Bayarlaa, Khatanghe. Now it's time for you to go to Shekhen.
 You want to see? Then watch. I have just tied the Kin back together. And still you doubt?
 We saw this when you answered our first question well. Bayarlaa, emshen. Let Mother Boddho caress your step.
 Be khara, I could use your good wishes.
 Go to Shekhen. Let Mother Boddho hold you to her bosom.
 Bayarlaa, esegher. We thank you for what you have done for our body. You are a yargachin. You are an emshen.
 Now tell me: What do you know about Father's death?
 What is an udurgh, Khatangher? I want to hear an answer from everyone who knows the word.
 What was my father's duty? Why did Earth reject him?
 Boleesh, boleesh… Who do you ask? I am but the Kin's hangnail, a fleck of their skin. I don't know that.
 Who does, then? Our Mother Superior? A six-year-old child?
 Have any of the elders survived?
 No.
 Then ask everyone you can. Gather a council in Shekhen. I'll come to you later for your answer.
 Fine. You'll leave this poisonous grave now, and soon. Otherwise the last person who might remember anything will die. We'll talk later.
 Why talk? You have come, so we are now whole. Among us blood, thoughts, words, all flow in our veins. No need for mouths. Listen. You know everything already.
 The udurgh is our town—or more precisely, its unity with Earth.
 I've come for answers. Are you ready to give them?
 Udurgh are the connections between all living things, however different. From a sand pest microbe to Mother Boddho.
 An udurgh is a toonto nuutag. A family. "A place that conceals the umbilical cord."
 Tiimeel daa, you're right. You are an emshen.
 My father's duty was to connect the Town again.
 Father tore apart the weak, diseased connections that caused this outbreak. But he failed to make new ones. That's why Earth refused to accept him.
 It doesn't matter what Father's duty was. What matters is that I accepted it. Succeeded him. And continued his Line.
 Father's duty was to protect the small, the weak, and the doomed. The ones that make life more beautiful… and the ones that make it <i>more.</i> Now and in the future.
 Tiimeel da, you're right. You are a yagarchin. We listen to your words; we nod in agreement. It's all true.
 You'd agree with anything I say!
 Wherever I look, everything's true… as if there were no lies in the world, eh?
 Bite kharaan, you have finally grasped the ultimate truth. Suok, the counterpart of our Mother Boddho, is death. And so we do not fear death.
 You'd nod in agreement with <i>whatever</i> I told you! Like what if I told you Father had been killed by a friend? Out of love, of course, and with the best of intentions. Would you nod along to this bullshit too?
 Hey, maybe <i>I</i> killed Father? That's what Rubin thought at first, anyway.
 The causes of Burakh-esegher's death were many.\nHe sought death and surrendered to it voluntarily. Was he the murderer? Suok touched him. Was she the murderer? You failed to reach him in time. Were you the murderer?
 No.
 It is so. You speak the truth. You know all the answers.\nThe body is whole… and knowledge flows through its veins. Listen to us all, including those who do not now stand here. You are part of the whole body.
 …It was Oyun.
 This is what our people said. Now you know.
 And you never told me!
 Who is to tell the truth but you? Why give away a man who seeks death?\nTrace the Line, yagarchin. You are in charge of us. We cannot force your hand.
 And he's not here, either. Cut himself off from the whole in advance…
 Yes. Now I know.
 Be kharanab… I knew this already…
 Bayarlaa, Khatanghe. I've learned all I wanted. Now it's time for me to return to the Town.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 …A wound in Earth's body?
 Yes, Burakh. Earth's body. The ground is special here. Wait. You didn't know?
 It's just a tale. A local legend.
 Our ground is normal.
 The three of you are solving it together. You, Dankovsky, and Clara the amnesiac. Each is looking for their piece. I never fail in such matters. But forget it. I found out your part myself.
 I just… didn't have enough time.
 What have you found out?
 Well, I've discovered your blood. It's underground.\nThere are caverns beneath the Abattoir. The blood of your ritual bulls was poured there. It doesn't rot. It's unclear why. It's abnormally vital—it even seeps to the surface sometimes.\nIs it true that it's forbidden to dig wells in this town?
 I see now. "All blood seeps from Olonngo…"
 Damn…
 Cheer up. If not for you, my thoughts wouldn't have gone that direction.\nIt won't bother me if you consider this a shared achievement.
 What do you plan to do now?
 …I understand. Now please be quiet for… twenty-five seconds. I need to think.
 …
 […twenty one …twenty two …twenty three …twenty four…]
 There is blood underground. The Polyhedron's base pierces the soil. Like an arrow's barb buried in a torso.\nSo all we need is to pull out the arrow.
 …And then blood will pour out, killing the wounded.
 Huh. I expected you to suggest that we demolish the Abattoir.
 You made that decision suspiciously fast…
 No. The last thing I need is a riot.
 So you're not afraid of children rioting…?
 It feels like you hate the Tower and are searching for an excuse.
 Thank you, doctor. You have assisted me in solving a puzzle. Nothing more is required of you.\nStandby until blood pours from the ground. Be ready to make a great deal of your medicine.
 That's it? So in your plans, I'm just benched…
 Wait. You don't understand! You can't just bleed the Earth dry! If it's truly a living creature, it will die.
 Bayarlaa for the honor… basaghan.
 …Get some rest, doctor. You're clearly overworked. Do something else. Or are you not busy enough as it is?
 I thought inquisitors were required to be open to belief in the impossible.
 You just don't care. Puzzle solved, right? To hell with everything else.
 No. Nothing surprises me anymore.
 Don't judge a book by its cover. Sometimes, people form unexpected connections!\nImagine—two people living in completely different worlds. Different habits, educations, and hobbies. But when they meet, their souls resonate! Connections like that make the world more… vibrant.
 Huh. You're the last person I expected to talk to me about connections.
 More philosophy.
 Sure. For adults. Not young girls…
 Volunteer?
 I work here, doctor. Don't you recognize me? I'm an orderly, same as everyone. This ain't even my first shift… I just don't have the costume today.\nWe're ordinary people under the masks.
 Right. Of course.
 
 
 
 
 "Don't even think about going to the Nutshell. Khan got down, and it has solid walls. And he tries to cross them. And they won't budge. I saw it too. He's angry like a ferret."
 Touch to read it. It's better to put it back after.
 Hasty Note
 "Proverbs are stories, just seen from a distance. Is this too much for you even to listen? Guess all you feel is seething indifference."
 What do you mean?
 Once again, I prove that first impressions have never failed me. The initial hypothesis is almost always correct. That's exactly how things turned out to be… literally <i>and</i> metaphysically.
 How is that possible?
 The Bachelor helped me figure it out. He spoke to the Stamatins, the Kains… many people. I don't have time to give a full accounting.\nWe meet here for <i>you</i> to report to <i>me,</i> not vice versa. And I haven't had sufficient sleep for far too long. Even I have my limits.
 Well, if you've figured it out, at least tell me how it remains in the air.
 …I was right, of course. The outbreak was caused by the Tower's creation. Both outbreaks, actually. This is the second time sand pest has occurred in this town, correct?
 It must feel great to solve a riddle when you already know the answer.
 Metaphysically? Are you for real?
 When was the Tower built?
 Damn…
 The ability to correlate facts is a useful skill to any investigator, Burakh. And a surgeon often serves as one too, wouldn't you agree?
 Eh.
 Yes. The First Outbreak happened five years ago.
 I'm a surgeon, not a diagnostician.
 Coincidences happen.
 Any attempt to subvert nature is met with resistance. That's the… <i>nature</i> of nature. Such is the matter you're made of, whether a person or a town.\nThey tried to subvert nature. It retaliated. The case is clear.
 Can you prove this?
 How exactly does it work?
 What would you have me report?
 Tell me, Artemy Burakh. Are you healthy? Are you thinking clearly?
 Oh. Yes, of course, the cure… I think I've found it.
 Then why exactly are we discussing doomed architecture?
 I know it might sound mad, but there may be blood underground. Lots of it.
 Clearly enough.
 I can tell it's a poem. But I don't know where it's from. And I can't recite it with you.
 Calm down… I'd prefer you not have a heart attack. I was speaking figuratively. Were you… speaking literally?
 Yes.
 The soil is… special here. The blood may still be used to make a panacea.
 Imagine a circulatory system below the Town. A maze of tunnels and chambers… Somewhere down there, blood flows.
 We could extract the blood. But digging wells is forbidden here, and no one would let us drill. Damn it! Wait…
 They've been evacuated. First thing the general did.\nI must give credit where it's merited—he's a remarkable individual. Especially for a military commander.
 Evacuated? When?
 What a lucky coincidence. Your doing, too?
 In the morning. And we aren't going to discuss it now.
 A town without children… Was this your doing, too?
 Strange. I thought Earth was your area of expertise. I was sure you'd be the one to uncover this part of the puzzle.
 Why did you think so?
 Who told you all this?
 Not you.
 I was busy caring for living people!
 What's your plan now?
 I am. And I feel like the real work's just beginning…
 You can't know it. For you, it's not yet written.
 Where's Rubin?
 No idea, doctor. Asleep, I guess. I hope. He's dead tired… been towing this whole hospital along on his own.
 Not on his own.
 I don't like this…
 And it's clearly run aground without him.
 A Kains' man all right.
 And what were you doing? Why haven't the bodies been taken away?
 They did all that while you just stood there? Worker of the year material!
 Don't raise your voice at me. It's a theatre, not a hospital, and I'm a coal-heaver, not a doctor. No one ever taught us how to fight the plague.\nShe's a cunning minx… mixing the dead and the living into one. One day she's silent, and the next she mows down a hundred. She'll mow your folk down too, mark my word…\nWe're doing the best we can.
 Your best sucks.
 She won't mow mine down. I take care of them.
 So what are our orders for today?
 We need to find the survivors in this meat grinder and return them to proper beds. Stat. I'll do it myself. You… heave some coal, coal-heaver.
 Prepare bandages and warm water. When I bring the survivors, you'll need to wash them.
 Orderly
 Zurkhen's Big Chamber
 Murky's Friend
 Capella
 Victoria Olgimskaya
 ???
 Nara
 I have nothing to report. Sorry.
 Do you know what our Cathedral is for?
 Not for service, that's for sure.
 Tell me.
 No one knows what the Kains' creations are for. The Polyhedron, the Cathedral, those dilapidated stairs… Do you even know yourself?
 It produces time.
 Meaning…?
 Like trees produce wind?
 Literally.
 I'm no physicist, but this is bullshit.
 All over the world? Or just in our town?
 Can this… production be stopped?
 Great question. You're an astute man, Doctor Burakh… Just like your father.\nTime is more complicated than we think. We perceive it as homogenous, uniform, and continuous. The key word being "perceive."
 Is our perception wrong?
 That's a lot of long words. I'm lost.
 There was a time when people believed the Sun rotated around an immobile Earth. It was obvious, wasn't it? Only, our eyes deceived us.\nThe same is true for time. It has many uncharted pores.
 Heliocentrism was discovered in ancient times.
 Time does move strange in our town.
 I never claimed otherwise. I was just illustrating my belief that human perception is limited. The poverty of our mind skews much in our eyes.\nFortunately, we can overcome it.
 By building cathedrals?
 Have you noticed how many clocks there are in the Town?
 And a bell that tolls every hour.
 Yeah. All of them similar, too. A mass-produced shipment from the outside world?
 Same as everywhere.
 All of these clocks are small Cathedrals. They don't measure time; they weave it. Time coils into loops beside them. Have you noticed?\nLike a hive. A queen makes larvae. Worker bees cradle, transport, and manage them. The Cathedral produces time. The clocks distribute it.
 If that was true, one could bargain with time. But I'm always running short on time, always late…
 …Yeah. I've noticed.
 These clocks are the best I've ever done for our town.
 So you made them? You have good reason to be proud, then.
 Yet you could have opened a school.
 I came to see you. Will you stop me?
 The sick go to a hospital. You may curse it, but you'd still go there to care for them. That's what doctors do, isn't it?\nI'm here for my children. I'm the only protector they have left. Khan might have done it, too… but he's not with us. So I say this in his stead: you aren't needed here.
 I don't give a damn about your tower. I just need to make sure you're all right.
 The Town's children are gathering here—the healthy ones, anyway. We'll be fine here. There's no sand pest inside. \nWe'll wait on the steps until tomorrow. Whoever shows any signs of it will descend. The rest will take shelter in the Polyhedron.
 Why?
 Children love this tower, Artemy. They just <i>do.</i> So let them stay here until the end… It's close, isn't it?\nThey're so happy here… if only you could see. I'm watching them be happy. Go. Don't disturb us. You're not needed here.
 Fine. Have it your way. Just tell them that I… care about them.
 You're cold, Victoria.
 
 
 
 
 
 Pochard
 
 Pochard
 
 Kayura
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pochard
 
 Pochard
 
 Pochard
 Then let's get back to the prose.
 Artillery, Burakh. The military. This is their direct obligation—to shoot at the Town. So let them shoot its least useful part.
 Sure… Everyone has to play a role in the Inquisitor's plot. Right?
 But there are children inside!
 They've been evacuated. First thing the general did.\nI must give credit where it's merited—he's a remarkable individual. Especially for a military commander.
 A town without children… Was that your doing, too?
 Finally you ask a question you don't already know the answer to.
 Ask no questions. Trust me.
 I'm not afraid of anything.
 It's not about trust. I simply realized nothing was holding me back there anymore. I've done all I could.
 Indeed, I no longer am.
 And I'm no longer yargachin, or emshen, or… whoever else. I'm leaving my fate behind.
 We both did. I believe it is right. We'll make our own path from now on.\nThis is the ultimate freedom, I think: departing from the track someone has laid for you.
 So you're in no danger now?
 Actually… where did this train come from?
 Wow. How did I manage that?
 Why are you so sincere all of a sudden?
 I deeply respect open-minded people, unconstrained by whatever is imposed upon them. Capable of finding less obvious connections.\nIt's a skill poets have… and steppe surgeons, it seems. What's the word…?
 Emshen. A knower of Lines.
 To hell with the Tower. An hour ago, I wished to settle the score with those who sent me here, irreversibly stifling my life. Now, I don't care.\nSomething unique occurred during our conversation. Something so important I'm comfortable changing my plans. \nIt's happening to you, too. Don't deny it.
 All right. I've made up my mind. Let's defy fate. Let's flee.
 Fleeing… What's the point? What is there for me to flee to?
 You've become special to me, too.
 …You've turned my world upside down again, Artemy Burakh. A self-taught, backwoods surgeon…\nFine. I'll send three couriers with the papers to the headquarters. And I'll leave town tonight. I have that option. But only if you come with me.
 I have a duty… to those people who have also become special to me.
 You don't have a duty! You came here to conquer fate. This is how it's done.
 Is it, now?
 Do you know why I marked you among many others? You gave me the key. You showed me that people can simply disregard those who pull their strings, those who set your path for you.\nThey tell you what victory is. But it's a lie. It rings false. True victory is breaking through the walls, changing the rules of the game. \nCome on. Make up your mind.
 But what about the children?
 Wake up, Burakh. There are no children. None of this is real.
 But what about the Tower? What if your couriers fail to deliver the papers? The Town is in chaos…
 We live in a large country. Lots of places to lie low for a bit. With a mind like yours, creating a new life will be simple.
 Try, at least! Better than walking meekly to your execution!
 Why would you want me?
 Because I can tell that we need each other.\nNo two people could be more unlike one another. We could have an interesting life together. I can see it. You can see it, with your heart, in the Lines…
 Holy hell…
 Aglaya Lilich, commissar of the omnipotent Powers That Be, and Artemy Burakh, a scab shed from the body of a godforsaken people. A brilliant couple.
 I agree.
 Huh. I didn't expect you'd agree.
 I want to abandon the tracks laid down for me. Now's the time to do it. Those are the Lines I see.
 Out of the question.
 Who <i>are</i> those people behind the scenes? The ones pulling our strings, or whatever?
 The ones who suggested this question to you, who fed you this thought. \nIf you agree to leave with me, I'll explain while we travel. It will be a long and difficult conversation.
 But I need to take care of the children…
 Seriously? You're fine with leaving before you watch the Polyhedron fall, no matter how much you loathe it?
 No, Aglaya Lilich. I may be a slave, I may be someone's puppet, but I will not abandon them.
 Father's duty is my duty. I can't. Even if it's all over, even if they're dead or doomed, what else could I do?
 You'll be enslaved to the words inside your head, to the story made before you. Not even made for you, but for someone else. What for?\nEven that girl Clara knows the more we twist in the spider's web, the worse we make it… for ourselves <i>and</i> others.
 No. If I doom everything by doing this, so be it. But I can't abandon them… My conscience is more important to me.
 A spiderweb… I see. So that's what the whole "making connections" thing was about… and I was like a spider. Fine. Let's leave the Town.
 Flee…in what transport? Speaking of, how did you get here in the first place? It's not like you flew in on a broom, surely.
 Yargachin.
 Let me guess: "I'll only return after they restock the chocolate."
 Come on, stop crying. You'll see her soon, if you manage to survive…
 It's an open question.
 That's it. The Town is officially dead.
 They'll be back, as soon as the plague is contained.
 Ever? You think so?
 More will be born.
 They'll be safer elsewhere.
 People call us by different names… Depends if the treatment worked.
 Well… let us part as friends. For the first time, I say this to someone I wanted to create patterns with.
 What's wrong?
 Am I not human?
 I didn't mean it like that… You are.
 What's never happened to you before?
 You're trying to convince Grief we're all puppets. So you must be one of the ones who considers themselves a puppeteer.
 Something strange is happening to me. I could put it into words—and yet I do not have the words. It's weakness. I must purge it from my heart.
 You must. You're an inquisitor, after all.
 A wise man once said: What we first consider weakness is in fact our source of greatest strength.
 The words you choose don't matter. What matters is always glimpsed between them, anyway.
 Speak to me.
 What about?
 So you do have a heart. That's a surprise.
 I don't know. Just speak. Touch me with your words.
 I'm not inclined towards touch lately. Touching others leads to certain death, now.
 I don't care. I mean, no… I do care. I can't talk about it.
 Are you scared?
 We have nothing to talk about. Your master's been damaged, and she's beyond help.
 Which words do you wish me to touch you with?
 Are you ashamed of what you're doing?
 Have you fallen in love, somehow?
 You'll die soon. Doctors can feel when death's inevitable. It lurks by people's bedsides, like in that story about the doctor who made a contract with him.
 Perhaps… Yes, you may be right.\nEnough. This is weakness. No more. I refuse it. No means no—and this is the final word I'll speak to myself.
 You can say whatever you like. It won't change anything.
 I'm sorry, Reflection. I really, truly am.
 You really are alive, huh. Warm blood and a beating heart…who would have guessed.
 Not on a broom, no. Don't ask unnecessary questions.
 Flee. On a broom, or on foot, but however you do it, flee.
 That's an inquisitor's skill. Ending the game—not in stalemate or checkmate, but by simply getting up from the table. I'd love to do the same, if I could.
 We have so few places of our own—only a couple. And yet you feel the urge to impose yourself even here.\nDo you know what childhood is? It's slavery. Herders treat their cattle better than parents treat their children. They lock us up like objects, mold us like statues, and still never take us remotely seriously.
 See that lantern over there? I fixed that. I've earned the right to be here.
 Wrong. Children have many places of their own. Me, Stakh, Grief, and Gravel would sometimes vanish for weeks…
 Are you talking about your own family?
 Whatever you say.
 What happened to you? Why are you here and not in the Tower?
 Of course not. I am a ruler's son. To me, my own issues must always be of least concern. But I'm not blind. I see the others.
 You're a responsible young man.
 So what happened to you, son of a ruler?
 …You happened to me.
 Me?
 I'm not shifting responsibility onto you. And I have no regrets. Going to that house was the right thing to do—I've heard it even helped slow the infection somewhat…\nHowever, in your place, I'd never allow two adolescents to venture inside a hotbed of infection.
 Damn it! All right, let me see your pupils. And be honest with me… Are you infected?
 Would you look at that… I'm once again the culprit.
 As if you wouldn't have gone without me, anyway! At least I supervised.
 I don't know anything for certain anymore. How long is its incubation period? No one knows. That means I can't go back to the Polyhedron.
 Is that so?
 Several hundred of my friends live there. I'm their leader. If there is even a miniscule chance that I've contracted sand pest…\nNo. I'm not even approaching the Tower unless I know for sure.
 And here I thought it was magic, that Polyhedron of yours.
 I can examine you. Face the light and open your eyes wider…
 If you're sick, we'll find you some shmowder.
 I have medicine. A true cure for sand pest. Very little of it, but…
 Surely you jest? Of course it's magic. Wondrous. Inexplicable. But the people inside… they're just people, made of flesh and bone.
 You're like a father to your soldiers, aren't you?
 
 
 You're a doctor. I'll accept your help if you decide it's required. To do otherwise would be pointless arrogance.\nBut this plague is like a wild cat. Today it hides, tomorrow it ambushes. I'd rather stay here for now.
 But here, inside the Town, is exactly where you're in the most danger!
 Fair enough. Perhaps you'll make peace with Notkin, after all.
 …And I apologize for the way I talked to you earlier.
 Forget it. I can tell it's hard for you to be away from that Tower.
 Apology accepted.
 It's I who should apologize. I should have taken better care of you…
 Don't worry. If you're sick, I'll find a way…
 There's no need for dramatic proclamations... of course I'll come.
 They've never been yours, blockhead.
 Gnarl
 She's a mathematician.
 Are you two colleagues?
 I need to sit down… I'm dizzy.
 Sounds like she got you turned around.
 Drink some water. Do you have any on you?
 Huh…
 I can see now that I've always had that in me. I see myself with different eyes…
 Wow. Wonder how I'll see myself after the interrogation.
 Hush. Calm down now.
 How does she know?
 She's an inquisitor's daughter.
 An inquisitor's daughter lives in our town?
 Don't even try. I'm not leaving. What do I need to do, give her poultices? Then hand them over.\nI won't leave the girl, and I won't let you take her. My Grace…
 …He said, from the far room.
 
 We finally meet, khөөrkhen. Do what you must.
 It's you…
 Nara. Your name is Nara.
 It's me.
 I… I can't…
 You knew all, this time…
 I recognize you.
 A terrible tragedy. Many dead…\nI've seen this disease before. Your father did everything right. I'd give my honor and my life not to let it happen again. But since it has already come to pass, let us take advantage of this tragedy.
 "Take advantage"? What are you talking about, tangher?
 Our people withered by the year, so that the Town grew. It was built on our bones.\nNow—the other way around. The Town withers, our people endure. Time to revive the Kin.
 Be khara, what we need now is unity, not discord!
 Bayarlaa, tangher.
 Still—tell me. You looked for mythical bulls among the steppe. The aurochs. Is it true they're extinct?
 I was looking for <i>ancient</i> bulls. Odonghe said they'd heard them bellow far away.\nThey were mistaken. I walked the steppe a long time. There are no more ancient bulls. The Town devoured them, as it devours us, the Kin, Khatanghe. Don't let this loss be for nothing. Go to the Warrens.
 Hopefully I'll come back with good news.
 Be khara, you're hiding something… but I'll ask Tycheek.
 Shagnalda, I'm going! Tycheek's daughter Taya is there. I need to see her.
 I won't kill anyone. I'm not a butcher.
 You are a butcher. He who knows the Lines is a butcher. He who can dissect a great bull is a butcher. He who fears not blood.\nPay the price for your father's authority. It is always paid in blood.
 This isn't my path.
 I'm a doctor, not a murderer.
 Death is nothing. Don't overvalue human life. People only matter as parts of an udurgh.\nA person is dissolved in "people," a person is dissolved in Earth. As separate entities, they matter not at all, whether alive or dead.
 I don't <i>fear</i> blood. But I'll find a different way to unite our people.
 Fine. You've convinced me.
 You are exhausted, dүү khүbүүn. You need sleep. Dreams will help you sort your thoughts.\nAs for me, I leave for Olonngo. My place is there. So too will yours, one day.
 Be kharanab, now's not the time to rest…
 I'm not a bull.
 I still don't believe you. Be oylgono ugyb… I don't understand.
 How did you get here? Why are you waiting for me?
 I'm not here for you.
 Then how…
 Be khara, you still do not understand. You need to find the blood yourself. See it with your eyes. Touch it with your hand. Taste it with your tongue.
 Be kharanab—more talk of traditions! Now's not the time.
 All I need is the material for a cure.
 Tenegh… then what's the matter? You'll get it.
 All right. I'm going.
 You need to spend time in the Abattoir, Kindred. Inside.
 …To become respected by the Kin?
 Hey, stranger. Take a good look at me. Do I look <i>that</i> untrustworthy? Is my face really only good for pointing a gun at?
 Well, I wouldn't shake your hand.
 Beak
 Talon
 "Any trickle of blood seeps from Olonngo." Off limits.
 "Any trickle of blood seeps from Olonngo."
 "Olonngo"
 Isidor Burakh was a father to more than just you. Do you realize this?
 Of course. I used to have a brother.
 Did Stakh get to you, too? Drop it. I understood his deal already.
 You mean he was like a father to this whole town?
 Stakh is dead, if that's who you meant.
 You walk Isidor's path, and you're very good at it! You have extraordinary hands—light like wings. I will always be by your side, will always help you with anything.\nExcept for one thing. You're not our father.
 <i>You</i> come to <i>me.</i> Not the other way around. The Lines lead you.
 Father's will was that I take care of you. That's enough for me.
 I'm not trying to be.
 Children are warm creatures. They smell of milk; they listen eagerly to your every word. And… you tried. I can see that.\nBut your care keeps us stuck in the past. In childhood. They need someone to lead them into the future.
 <i>I</i> keep you in the past? How exactly? I don't ground anyone; I don't even make them bathe!
 Wait, what? Ah, shudher!
 Chainlink
 Well, I doubt you are.
 This is for you.
 Come on, tell me. What is it about?
 What are you giving me?
 The anarchist was executed. On her body, we've found a document. See here: "I, Lara Ravel, conceived the murder of General Block alone. No one knew of my plans. If anyone called Rubin, Burakh, or Filin claims to be my accomplice, disregard them. I've done it myself."
 Lara! Why... no, wait... "executed"?
 What have you done to her, you pieces of shit?!
 Oh Gravel, what have you done...
 She came here. She produced a weapon. We don't take kindly to anarchists.
 No... No, no, no...
 Where's the body...?
 
 
 
 
 You're too late, doctor. Should have come two weeks ago, when Uncle Simon was still alive. Now, nothing can be fixed.
 Simon was old.
 Me? A local milkwoman.
 Yeah, sure.
 To hell with those squaddies. They didn't let me near the Station, so I couldn't even say goodbye! I just wanted one last look at the kids. Just for that, they damn near shot me!
 You look healthy. That's what matters.
 You'll meet them again.
 Was one of yours there?
 Not my children—I'm a teacher. Organized classes… You know we lack a proper school, but they did show up. They worked hard, even…
 I'm sorry.
 Quit feeling sorry for yourself.
 Is there any trust left at all in this town?
 What kids?
 Haven't you heard? They've been evacuated. At least they're safe…\nIt's how it should be. When a ship sinks, the lifeboats go to the women and children first. You just have to hope there's enough space for them.
 Fair enough.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Aide
 Are you Burakh? Filin? Rubin?
 I'm Burakh.
 Khyyr…
 Khyyr… Yes, a grave. A tomb. But what do you mean?
 Noukherne… Say more!
 Byy alysh…
 "Do not kill." Whom?
 Baygalday, don't be silent…
 .....
 Then again, who cares what you say… Here it is, the scariest day of my life.
 You haven't let me down. Bayarlaa, Kindred.
 I thought we had become best friends! But the moment I needed you, you vanished! Why? Were you scared of my knife?
 Look who's back! Where have you been, stranger?
 .      .      ..
 Don't leave me again, all right? Or I'll have to tether you.
 All right, all right. Who's a good bull? I'm not mad. You just left at a bad time.
 ... ..
 If you knew what went on here, you wouldn't have come back. Or is that exactly the reason you did?
 I'd run off too, if I could… but, not yet.
 Got anything to say?
 I don't feel too good. My eyes are burning, like I'm looking at hellfire. So, time to say goodbye, then? You know… just in case.
 Remember how we first met? By Father's house…
 Murky dropped by. Brought a sack of herbs. I guess she wanted to make a wreath, but… well, the only wreaths we need now would be memorial.
 "Funeral." It's "funeral wreaths" and "memorial candles."
 Memorial wreaths, my ass! No one's dying on my watch.
 Well, can't deny it anymore—I did think you were it, back then. The murderer, I mean…
 You wolfling…
 And we've done a great job! Now all you need is to brew the potions… right? Make some more?
 I will. Promise.
 There'll be another time for goodbyes… Remember how you wanted to rob that shop? For a good cause?
 It was a bad idea… We should have switched. I should have done the talking, and you, the robbing… I was too slow…
 Patrolmen would have had a field trip with <i>that</i> combination.
 But I wasn't such a villain after all.
 You just… you… help the others first, all right? I can bear it. The cauldron is close by. Working on me won't take long.
 I know better how to handle this.
 Quiet, you martyr. Let me think.
 I respect your attitude. Now hush and let me examine you.
 Uh huh. You were on the verge of spanking me. "That's a lesson for you! Respect the law!" Like the law's ever done anything respectable.
 Is that really your biggest concern now…?
 …
 If only I had enough raw material to make medicine for everyone!
 That's all right. We'll do plenty of jobs in the future.
 You didn't like Murky at first, remember? Were all so cranky…
 Me? Cranky? No way!\nIt's different. You're never home, so I had to run the household. I was just… concerned. Trying to find food for us both…
 I'll cure you all, and we'll move into a normal house. We'll have a normal life…
 It's all for the best, pal. As it will be. Everything'll be all right, you'll see.
 Fair enough. Thank you for that.
 No. No goodbyes. We've just met, and now you want to say goodbye?
 I'm sorry, kid. Just be patient a little while longer.
 Hello. I recognize you. I can feel you though this cloth. You're… you. Burakh's son. No… just Burakh. Your name is Artemy, I remember. It doesn't matter that you're a son… I misspoke… You're on your own… right? Right. On your own.\nI… I want to ask something of you.
 I'll cure you.
 Anything.
 I'll try. And… thank you for saying this.
 This architect… he's an artist… and he's… he's… he's my new friend! And I… I don't want him to die.\nBut he refuses to leave, to leave me alone. Let… Let him… take him away from here! Away from me!
 You'll live. You hear me? You'll live!
 I know what you want to ask. But Stamatin won't leave.
 That idiot… That moron…
 You don't understand. Peter needs help. Today is the last day.
 Does he talk to you like Father did?
 Peter is dead, but you're still alive. I want to take care of you first.
 I've already failed him once.
 You're the only one I have left. Take this key. Give it to Andrey—today. He'll understand.
 Hand it over.
 And you know what… let's not say goodbye, all right? No one ever truly leaves, you know.
 I will.
 All right.
 He'll get sick… It's dangerous for him here! Dangerous to be with me…
 Maybe he grew attached to you? He won't leave you.
 We won't say goodbye. But for another reason.
 Don't you dare. People need you here—the living and the dead.
 Yes. And I want to do something good. While there's still anything of him left… and of me.
 Tell me.
 I'll give him a protective pill.
 I'm sorry.
 Clothes
 Blood-Kin
 You're a funny creature…
 "Thou shalt not fear the terror by night; nor for the arrow that flieth by day;\nNor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for the destruction that wasteth at noonday."\nRemember the psalm? I've always been curious why the pestilence "walks" there. Like it's a living creature…
 No, I don't. I'm not a psalm person.
 Why are you reciting psalms?
 Well, it's supposed to be a protective chant. From pestilence… and also, "A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; but it shall not come nigh thee."
 Oh, it shall, whether you pray or not.
 Stop fretting. It won't touch you. You drink like a fish, and liquid courage offers good protection…
 I'm not praying for myself, blockhead. It's for her.
 For who?
 Perhaps there is a reason.
 Little girls? I'm not sure. Raspberries and earthworms, I believe, although you need to chew them yourself first.
 Really…?
 No, you idiot! Bread, meat, milk, vegetables! Whatever you have…
 Sure.
 To feed her normally?
 To give her a separate room?
 No! \nWhy do we keep insisting that buildings have to go upwards? I want to create a Great Pit, Burakh! Get it? Like a Polyhedron, but <i>down,</i> not up!
 Peter… Get some sleep.
 That's… uh… genius?
 Pits are frowned upon around here, don't you know? Even regular ones.
 Wait! The Polyhedron defied the law of gravity—so the Pit would completely defy our perception of space! Our understanding of up and down! Do you get it? Do you?
 I don't.
 Peter. You need to get some sleep. I mean it. Tomorrow, when your head is clearer, you'll draw that pit of yours.
 You've just invented humanity's mass grave. Is that it?
 A pit! A genius pit…
 So that's how you and Grace connected…
 Peter, I'll take her from you in a couple of days. Got it?
 Have some sleep. You'll dream of that pit of yours.
 Actually, he's the one who's supposed to take care of you.
 I'll take you in… later. When this is all over.
 What?
 The plague.
 Everything.
 It won't ever be over. But that's okay. It's all okay.
 This Peter… he doesn't hurt you in any way, does he?
 Then stay here for now… and stay alive. Both of you.
 I'll take you in when the time comes.
 No. I'm your family.
 Just wait here a little while longer… All right?
 Shall we sing a song together?
 You've done a great deed, Kindred. "Tom naymaa," the elders would have said. "A deed," I will say.\nAnd you've done it all on your own.
 Yes. I have done it on my own.
 I'm sorry I haven't reported to you. Tycheek's dead…
 They demanded Vlad Olgimsky. And then I realized…
 I had to kill.
 Silence, Kindred.\nYou've done well. It's not the herder's place to report to cattle.
 You aren't cattle, Kindred! You're Father's friend. And my senior.
 …
 I wanted Isidor's son—little Artemy—to take his place among the Kin. The place of a man who decides his own path.\nYour father was always wilful. He lived in the Town. Took a non-Khatangher as a wife. Made friends with madmen from Bridge Square.\nI advised him, and I accepted the slander, so that he could be free in his decisions. Now you take his place.
 I just didn't have time to drop by, that's all!
 I'm glad you approve of my actions.
 What about Olonngo's blood…?
 There will be blood. Later.
 Fine. I'm waiting, Kindred.
 Thank you.
 You chose the path of strength, Kindred. I respect that.
 Yes. I chose the path of strength.
 Not sure it's worthy of respect…
 Everyone respects strength.
 Fine.
 What matters is that the people are free now.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 
 
 "THEY SAY YOU CANT TAKE YOUR HALF IT WONT BE LET ON THE TRAIN. WERE GOING ON FOOT."
 "My bones remain in this ground. I've buried a tooth by every bridge."
 "Last chance to leave for the Nest. Same price, same place, but I'm a different guide. Make no mistake."
 "Final Chapter: 'Life is fun and life is laughter from this moment hereafter. Life is laughter, life is fun, save me please I have to run.'"
 "Teddy bear LOST! I'm not leaving without you! I'll give away ALL MY TREASURES!"
 "Howling all night. Our farewell song. TL, with the first star."
 "You whiners! If you tie a piece of thread to a railing of your house, you'll be back. You sure will!"
 "DONT TIE THЯEADS TO YOUR RAILINGS! Itll come! It takes it as a sign!"
 "I'll never forget you."
 "PLEASE dont touch my pointy bag if you find it PLEASE they wouldnt let me take much it has a note and everything PLEASE"
 "Scared they'll burn me. If they do, I'd rather leave a paper here. I'd rather be a paper."
 "Keep this note. It has my memories and my Line."
 "To the boy who wrote LETS MEET BY THE TURNER,\nI'll wait as long as I can. I like your poems. I'll miss them."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  ....
 <i>…Bohir, bohir, let us dance, a couple merry fellows… Booha shalzha, let us sing, hear a booha bellow…</i>
  ...  .
 <i>…Ay-ya, booha, ay-ya! Khatar naada hoog-zhoya… Ay-ya, ay-ya! Khatar naada hoog-zhoya.</i> Do you know this song, good boy?
     ....
 Pah. You're boring. Not even touched by music.
 Ontokho khelekhe. Tell me a tale. It'll hurt less if you do.
 Yamar yuumen toukhai? What kind of tale would you like?
 If I can remember any...
 No. No tales today. Stay quiet, I'll bring you a cure.
 Tell me a scary one. The one where we stayed in that house of stone and died.
 It's a sad tale. Thank heavens it's just a tale.
 Tell me how we all could have lived in Shekhen…
 Well… there once was a girl… Shudkher! I can't, little one. I'm no good at inventing such tales…
 Then stay with me a bit here, ontokho khelekhe. Tell me a tale. It'll ease my pain a bit if you do… Be naydamtay bolokho…
 Yamar yuumen toukhai? What kind of tale would you like?
 I don't know, either! Khan left them. But why? Did they force him out?
 Where did he go?
 To the Nutshell, of course!\nOur lot said he's sitting there, all shut in and refusing to come out. Aren't you interested in what happened? You're so boring!
 Hm… I <i>am</i> interested.
 Remind me, the Dogheads are…?
 You've got enough fun for two, though.
 I don't feel so good, doctor. Maybe you got a pill or something?\nYou're… a good man. All of us agree. That's what they say, "He's a decent guy, a good guy. His heart's in the right place." But is it, Burakh?
 Remember that trial of yours?
 How could we forget. You offered fair judgment back then.\nWe threw Lika in the well… and he deserved it. He poisoned our dogs, so he deserved a dog's death. Earth is the fairest of judges, as our friend Namar likes to say…
 I'm sorry about Patches, boy. I couldn't figure out what to do with this pest. Got confused. Forgive me.
 I guess he deserved it.
 You've dragged yourself from the other side once, and you'll do it again. You're a stubborn kid.
 Well! Lots of things have happened…\nHey, how's Khan doing? Tell him I got no grudges… He's a decent guy.
 He is. That's why he's sick, too…
 I'm sorry, friend. I'll take care of Jester somehow.
 Well… it can't be helped now, can it? That big-city asshole got you confused too, remember? But he turned out to be a decent guy too in the end.\nWe all deserve one another.
 Are you mad at me?
 Remember your trial? How you wanted to execute Lika? Some inquisitors…
 Stop the drama. You're a fighter. I'll have you up and running in no time.
 Patches.
 
 Your Grief's six feet under! Now it's Barley's turn to call the shots.\nDidn't you know? Aren't you supposed to be the wise healer round here? Some friend to him you were, eh?
 Shut the fuck up, you piece of shit.
 …I knew.
 Fair enough.
 Whoa. "Your" Grace? Fatherly instincts kicking in?
 Like you have a choice… You two belong together now. Try to take care of each other.
 She's like a gulp of fresh water, old boy. She sings lullabies to my paintings. Lullabies! They're alive to her. Or dead… but they're people. People! Do you understand? \nI can almost stand looking at them without nausea now, too…
 So you <i>do</i> know what water is?
 It's because she's a child.
 
 Don't you shame me! I'm afraid, yes. Afraid of looking at her, at that rotten rag instead of a face. Afraid of how she's wheezing. Standing there stock-still. Why do they always stand? She won't sit or lie down…\nBut don't you dare assume. I'll do… whatever it is I need to do. Just let me find my courage…
 Who knew you'd turn out to be so loyal.
 Why do you think we care what happens you?
 I've forgotten that children are cruel and fearless.
 This place is dangerous.
 How are you special?
 We're from the inside. You won't understand. We can barely wrap our heads around it ourselves.
 From the inside? Why did you come out, then?
 If you don't care about me, think about yourselves, at least! This area is infected! Shoo!
 If it falls, it <i>will</i> be because of you.
 I'm not <i>that</i> big.
 You're not afraid of anything, are you, creepy kids?
 Fine. To hell with you.
 …Well, all right, go. You'll only see stairs and catwalks anyway.
 Thanks, I guess.
 As opposed to…?
 Sounds ominous…
 What a rude question. Where did <i>you</i> get <i>yours?</i>
 I'm human.
 But last time I saw you, you were floating! Or was that a different rat?
 Burakh. When an actor on stage gets a bullet through their head, do you also pester them about how they managed to cure that when you meet them the day after? No. You don't even ask that yourself. You die, stand back up, dust yourself off, and keep on going.\nThese are just legs.
 So you're an actor?
 This tumor is malignant.
 I can see that.
 I know you. You aren't just any rat. You're a theatrical rat.
 But…you were different before. You stood on your own legs. I even thought you might just be a kid in a mask, or a little person.
 That was a different creature. Not me.
 Huh… then, what are you?
 So many rats running around these days…
 Like hell! I won't let you have them!
 Yes… You are a wonder, too. "Plague, monsters, and wonders." Such is our tragedy.
 Don't you? How many children are holed up in your house? How many did you promise to take in at some point? How many did you consider protecting?
 Like I wanted to! It would be so much easier on my own…
 There's a <i>plague,</i> if you haven't noticed. Is there any place safer than a doctor's house?
 What are you getting at?
 So if you weren't a doctor, you wouldn't care about us?
 I <i>am</i> a doctor. No point in "ifs."
 Well… who knows. What are you getting at?
 So you're suggesting I abandon you all to the whims of fate?
 Scattered thoughts and anxieties pop into my head… because we're connected, you and I. \nI'm sorry you have to hear them sometimes… That's my mother awakening inside me. I can't help it. Because I see you.
 It's all right. Useful, even.
 I accept your apology. But don't do it again.
 I had a dream yesterday. All our children lay on the ground, and a white flower grew from each of their heads. You'd water them when they were sad, and sometimes picked leaves from them for your potions.\nAnd then a cart ran over them all, and its wheels ground them to dust.
 Yeah. I've been having uncanny dreams lately too. I'm exhausted…
 …They'll soon die and turn to soil?
 …Someone else is coming to the Town? Death, in an iron cart?
 …I'm not doing enough for them?
 "I suggest we burn TL with honor. I feel we're not gonna return."
 "I gave all my stashes away to the birds. You do that too. They need it more now."
 "I dont need a town without Riska."
 "IF WE STЯIKE THEY WOИT TAKE US ANYWHEЯE!!!"
 "Instruction: choose four favorite things, take them with you, hide the rest under boards rocks. Barter one of your favorites to a friend."
 "My secret will is: I leave everything to the Big Tree. If you find any of my shit, bring it there. Just don’t take anything for yourself!"
 "Don't take it away. It wants to stay right here."
 Polite Note
 Memorable Note
 Crumpled Note
 Coarse Note
 Rhythmic Note
 Scared Note
 Mournful Note
 Confused Note
 Distressed Note
 Dropped Note
 Tear-Stained Note
 Rough Note
 Helpless Note
 Small Note
 Lonely Note
 Sad Note
 Desperate Note
 Damp Note
 Final Note
 Smooth Note
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 Won't reach the addressee anymore.
 You know? When you get tired of watching the pendulum, do drop by.
 Ugh! Here we go again.
 I'm done. I'm done, you hear me? Get a hold of yourself!
 Unacceptable! I'm saying this as a Mother Superior! Ontokho khelekhe.
 Fine. What kind of tale do you want to hear?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The Khatanghe are making me a personal yurt, all mine! It'll be all colorful, with a shanyrak on top. Yag iim baina! All Shekhen will see me!\nAnd you know what? You don't have the same!
 Teasing me, Mother?
 Do share! I'd sell my soul for sweet talh…
 Living with you? That's a bold proposal…
 That'll make you a true Mother Superior.
 You're keeping everyone busy, then. Good job.
 Like I could compare to you!
 You have so many ideas… I can tell you're a serious person from a mile away.
 …How could she become a dead man's ward?
 …A dead man? But—but he came in person…\nOh. I see. It must have been Peter's brother. They're twins…
 Twins or not, they're hard to mistake for one another.
 It's not that important. What matters is if the girl's looked after.
 In any case, Grace lives at Peter Stamatin's place now. It's a tall, sturdy building with thick walls and snug window-frames. It offers good protection from plague and bad weather. That's what matters.
 Nothing offers good protection from plague.
 You're right. We needed to minimize her contact with corpses. That was… potentially dangerous.
 You're all insane…
 I thought you and Peter became friends. I kind of expected you'd stay with him.
 So did I… but Mother said I can't. He forgets about me sometimes. And no one brings him milk and bread, for some reason…
 Fair enough. But you can visit him sometimes.
 She shouldn't have said that…
 
 It's a beautiful tale. But I don't know it…
 And my throat hurts, too… Ankhadaghaa aman boloshohon… Do you have a pill that makes it less painful to swallow?
 I'll cure you, little one. I swear…
 I don't remember how it goes… It hurts. How does it go?
 I don't remember either…
 Is there really such a tale?
 <i>The beige thread has snapped.</i>
 <i>The Shelter smells of gunpowder. Rusty iron. Snowmelt by a brick wall. Don't be late this time.</i>
 <i>Hey… If you hear this echo of me… Lara…</i>
 <i>An echo… My final echo… Aglaya…</i>
 <i>The beige thread has snapped.</i>
  
  
 I'm all three. What is it?
 Bury me somewhere 'round those rocks. All right? I want to grow into swevery. It'll be pretty…
 Remember how you taught me to pick herbs?
 You won't die. You hear? You hear me?
 Yeah…
 I know. You're about to say you don't need me and there's nothing about me to love.
 I won't say that… I loved you the moment I saw you. Yeah.
 Listen to me! I saved you from the sand pest once, and I'll do it again. Just wait a little.
 Forgive me, kiddo…
 Forgive me, kiddo. I know I can't save you all. You're right. You don't need me, and there's nothing about me to love.
 But I am. We've failed to connect, I'm afraid, and it doesn't look like we'll get a chance. I may even regret it somewhat.
 We connected well enough in the House of Death.
 Are you unhappy I failed to get along with your sister?
 I was hoping that magic lantern over there would warm you a bit. I fixed it, you know.
 I understand we're only adolescent kids. Hot-headed, maybe. But I still can't understand your reasons. I never would have done what you did.
 Perhaps you'll understand someday.
 I will not discuss my family with you.
 Fair enough. Although, I'd like to ask you a thing or two about Simon someday…
 Thank you. Now fix the infected people—someone, anyone. I'm not asking for myself, but for my friends.
 The words of a young leader…
 I regret it too. Although, our fathers managed it. Perhaps we also had a chance… Who knows.
 Well, if we stop chatting and you try to do something, there is a chance it might happen. In theory.
 Ah, the Kains…
 I'll try.
 You and Notkin did everything yourselves. Now how do you plan to survive?
 As you wish.
 Aren't you the kid I first met in a twyrine den?
 So it was <i>me</i> who goaded <i>you</i> into it? Are you shameless enough to say that with a straight face?
 That's a very mature line of thinking.
 You were so worried about safety… but now you're back. Changed your mind?
 Dankovsky said I was healthy.
 You do look healthy.
 Unless you've contracted the infection on your way here.
 They aren't here. Because of <i>you.</i>
 Yes.
 Capella is alive. And I won't let her die.
 No.
 Well, you're one hell of a judge…
 Go away. We don't <i>need</i> you. You can't save anyone.
 We'll see about that.
 True. I can't.
 No one can save anyone.
 Ishka
 Khan's gone. Capella's gone.
 I know…
 It will go well. Everything in little Taya's life will go well. I promise.
  
  
  
  
 You know what my fingers tell me? "Come, we need you, Mother." I've been here for a long time. If they call for me, I'll go! 'Cause they're calling. I'm Mother, I need to care for them… Khyygedi be oshokho.
 Hush, little one. Be patient, like the brave girl you are.
 You're not going anywhere, dүү basaghan. I won't let you.
 <i>Barbaaday, I've found a bull…</i> Come on, you need to fold your fingers as I speak! Fold your thumb.
 Here. Folded.
 I don't know this song…
 Isidor Ghazar
 "To the purson from the very very far future: Pleaze remembur me. Your Neela."
 Lucky Find
 Yeah, I know… I have an ear for music, but the voice, it could use work.
 I guess you're right. Now isn't the time for merry songs.
 .....
 I hope you're not about to talk just yet. I guess I should give you a name?
 ..... 
 I'll call you Noukher. "Partner." So that you won't let me down, khayaala.
 Duugai. "Silent." I hope you remain such.
 Mounkhe, that's what I'll call you. "Eternity."
 .. ..
 Everyone I'm close with has gone silent. You do the same, Duugai.
 
 
 Measly
 .......
 Yes. It suits you.
 Noukher, Partner
 Duugai, the Silent
 Mounkhe, Eternity
 No. It's not right to impose a name upon someone. Perhaps you want to introduce yourself…?
 "The plague game," my ass…
 I wonder how you think to stop me.
 I have a weapon against you.
 Why do you do it? Why the kids…?
 What do you mean, "overcome death"? You <i>are</i> death!
 Untrue! I am not the same as death. I am but a test of menfolk's ken and prowess to overcome their bounds. And of all known bounds, death is the greatest tangle.\nThat you will die is naught but a belief… Worms, halfmen, so far from overmen!
 I won't let you experiment on us like that.
 What makes you think the kids want this transformation?
 They do! And if they don't, they will. That is the path your father set for them. That's why your "list" bears their names. The Town's future. The yeast to make it rise. 
 I won't let you have them.
 I am both fiend and wonder, true.\nStop, Burakh. You can't bring them back. It is beyond your power. You know not what I am; so how can you stop my reach? You can't guard them. You can't stop this.
 Even children managed to make a cure for you. Five years ago. "Schmowders…"
 What tidings?
 Block had all the young ones taken away. They've been crammed into a train and sent away while you daydreamed.\nFew are left. Your wards… My wards, now. The Town that used to be ruled by children has been left childless.\nWhat a thought…
 So mine are the last…
 No, wonder-creature. They are mine.
 A town with no future. This is it, then.
 Good to see you, Burakh. How are the rest of our lot…?
 Hello, chief. How are you? Holding it together?
 Yeah… living in a cellar isn't particularly fun. But neither is living in a train car.
 I'm glad I stayed here.
 You belong here. I knew it the moment I saw you.
 The outside world has finally made itself busy with solving our town's fate. What does this mean for me?
 An inquisitor arrived to the Town. She wants to see me. I've nothing to show her, but hiding is not an option.
 An inquisitor arrived to the Town. She wants to see me. I know what to show her.
 As usual, I act first and think later. I've made a panacea. But from what? What blood was that? <i>Whose</i> blood was that?\n\nTo cure the Town, I'll need to figure that out.
 We have a cure. It cost Rubin his life.\n\n…So now he won't be able to tell me what he made it from. How can I make more? I need an advice from someone well-versed in blood.
 Odongh
 Talked to them already.
 Simple townsfolk know more than it seems. If I'm unsure what to do, I should talk to them. 
 
 
 They allowed me on the Polyhedron… Missing the opportunity would be a waste.
 
 
 The world is very beautiful indeed.
 Where do I find Khan?
 ...
 She lives at Peter Stamatin's place.
 What about Khan?
 He's in the Nutshell.
 What about Grace?
 I see... thanks.
 Thank you.
 Of course…
 …Something's wrong with me. I can't raise my arms for some reason! What's going on?
 …What it is?
 I'm sorry…
 That's because I… in the Theatre… ah, forget it.
 You'll sing a different tune if you get infected… God forbid.
 This panic is tearing the Town apart! Can't you see what it brings us to?
 What?
 People burning each other!
 Mistress Katerina taught us the only path to understanding the self is through suffering. We witness the people's interpretation of her words.\nThey're not trying to kill those infected, you know. No… the hope is that pain and fire would cleanse them, somehow. Dark Age hysteria…
 Stop trying to blame everything on the Mistresses. Think for yourself!
 More fantasies. People can't even lose their mind right in this town…
 Sister Steppe holds some herbs in her bosom. Others, she grants to us. Then there are special herbs, the ones in the marble nest itself.
 In the "marble nest"?
 "Sister Steppe"? I thought it was perceived as a mother.
 Mother to you. Sister to me.
 So where does your sister keep the special herbs?
 In the Town.\nWhite whip is a bitter herb. It splits open the ground in infected districts.\nAshen swish grows wherever swishing is heard, like the singing of sharpened knives. It can be found in districts where blood is shed.
 Huh. Why is that?
 That's useful information. Thank you.
 Herbs are people, too. Each has a different taste.
 They do taste different.
 Thank you for the advice, friend.
 She's dancing by the cemetery today.
 Who?
 Your bride.
 I don't have a bride.
 My bride… You mean the strange girl that follows me around?
 She's dancing by the cemetery today.
 …Can you at least tell me who she is?
 What does this mean for me?
 She's an Herb Bride. You're a butcher. You know the rest.
 No! I don't…
 I'm not a butcher. I'm a surgeon.
 She's dancing by the cemetery today.
 Throwing sacks into the Gullet? Curious.
 But that's no reason to arrest her! She's here on official business.
 A bow to you, emshen. A bow, yargachin. You see the Lines far ahead; we only see them close. Earth tells us that Burakh's Line will lead him to great wrath soon. You will face a trial.\nTo help, we offer you a gift: our silence.
 What trial?
 Silence? How will your silence be of help to me?
 Are you testing me? You already know: the Lines are the art of hearing. Hearing the cavities within solid bodies; hearing the points where flesh longs to give in; hearing where <i>the world</i> longs to give in.\nYou're a hearer. Murmurs and commotion distract you. So we fall silent.
 Oh, come on. It's the opposite. I need your advice…
 You know that better than me, yargachin. Isn't there enough pain in your life?
 I know nothing.
 But how will your silence help?
 You need no advice from the crowd, or the murmuring of passers.\nListen to your heart, emshen. Listen to whoever is important. The Kin will no longer speak to you in the streets.
 I hope you reconsider.
 Time has become denser, somehow. Can you feel it?
 Exhaustion makes everything a blur.
 Yeah! It's like it moves faster now. You've noticed it, too?
 You can tell. Where does time come from? The Cathedral makes it. That's why it's always been empty. No need to crowd the place; time can only move on freely when it's empty.\nAnd she's sitting there like a spider. Must have broken something.
 Not "something," but someone. Half the people around… The bitch.
 If she's broken something, it would have been on purpose, believe me.
 ............
 Yes, Khatangher. Do it.
 No, it's a bad idea.
 .........?
 Sure. I understand.
 ............
 Bayarlaa, Khatangher.
 .......
 ........
 You know… I had a dream.\nI saw that longneck once, the one your doll is shaped like… It does exist. I tried to track it, slept in the steppe… Everyone I told about it laughed at me…\nBut I have seen it! Honestly! It's the last vampire, a shabnak-adyg…
 They do exist. Earth makes them from clay and bones… but they're not evil.
 We're here to see you… Stop it, Stakh!
 Yeah… I fell asleep here. I'm exhausted…
 How did you find me? Did you wait long?
 She dragged me here. Says you're not guilty. But you are!
 Are you off your rocker? What of?
 I'll be damned… you shaved your head. Preparing to become a monk? Or a soldier?
 Really?
 Really.
 I've seen them, too. So it wasn't the last… I hope. We'll find more. You'll see them with your own eyes!
 I believe you.
 They were all taken away from me… on a train car. Everyone under my wing. The future of the Town.
 I know.
 Take care of Khan. He's in the Nutshell.
 I know.
 Is there anything else you can do? Anything at all?
 It's not over yet. I'll think of something.
 Thank you. I'll check up on him.
 …Your subjects.
 No. Not my subjects. My children. They would have remained my children even as they'd grown up…
 So you've become a Mistress after all.
 You care about him a lot.
 Very much so.
 Do you love him?
 No. Not yet.
 Does he love you?
 I don't know. And truly, I don't care. You wouldn't understand. But we must be together.
 …For the good of the Town.
 Dynastic marriages…
 I see. Although… no, to be honest, I don't understand.
 He'll live. I promise.
 They'll return. Nothing is over, do you hear me? This is just the beginning!
 That's why I came, Victoria… to apologize. To you all…
 I'll get more of… that thing the panacea's made from. You'll all get better. I just need time.
 Please take care of my children… if any are still left in the Town, if any are still alive. Someone must be—I can tell! But my senses are clouded by pain… I can barely see.\nGod, it hurts so much… so much…
 I will. Don't worry. Take care of yourself for now. And hold on…
 I'm sorry I failed you.
 Farewell.
 You came because you sensed me thinking of you. Inadvertently, I touched you with my thoughts. And it isn't the first time…
 Why?
 Indeed it isn't.
 What else do you see? Tell me now, please, instead of barging into my head.
 I see that you and I have different paths. You are about to do something terrible—and destroy all the children.
 How so?
 You're seeing it wrong.
 Actually, you're right. Death is coming to our town in an iron cart. Precisely.\nSo you see these dreams, too?
 Death came to our town a week ago.
 You thought you were the only one? Mistress…
 Yes. They need help. Mine, not yours.
 Go home, girl. And take the others with you. It's safe there.
 I'm taking them from you. The ones you took care of. I'll do it now. And I'll do it better.
 "Taking them"? What do you mean?
 You're one of the children in my care. Go home.
 You can't look after them as I do. They'll die if they remain your wards. Because you're still so far from understanding. You can't sense the Town as I do.\nI'm taking them from you.
 You're in danger too! Irresponsible girl… You'll be the first to die!
 Wait. Let's not argue, or we'll make a mess… Can you explain this all to me, in more detail?
 Maybe you'll lead them—one day. But right now, you're an adolescent girl, Victoria! How old are you, like fifteen?
 No. Even if I die, I'll still linger… in them. In you all. Even in you yourself. I have seen that, too.
 Strange… So have I.
 So you want to become a Mistress…
 I am becoming one already. So looking after them is my duty.
 You're getting ahead of yourself.
 Still, we're too different, you and I. I will always be your ally. But we aren't friends. I'm sorry.
 I can see that. Taking the children! Friends don't do that.
 I thought better of you, Victoria Olgimskaya. Your mother would never have done this. And leave my thoughts alone!
 You truly are your father's daughter. Children always succeed their parents…
 What do you mean, you'll linger in me? Like—intruding on my thoughts, even if you die?
 Perhaps.
 I still hope that was just my intuition, that you just have an overly active imagination.
 Khembe? Who is it? Who's there? Take this nasty cloth off of me, someone…
 It's me, kid…
 Emshen! You're not curing me, and my fingers… It hurts, khurganuudni untarna. It hurts!
 What do your fingers say?
 Do your fingers hurt?
 Come now… Yamar berkhe basaghan bai, you're doing great, girl! Just bear it a little more.
 Who's this?
 Me.
 Who did you expect? The angel of death?
 Just tell me, and don't ask idle questions about <i>relationships!</i> Is Capella alive?
 She is. For now.
 I'm sorry. No.
 Capella is the soul of this town. She'll live forever as such. That's her true existence.
 I knew you by the smell.
 How are you, kiddo?
  
 You shouldn't be here… Would you like me to carry you home?
 You don't need water right now, but you'll drink a lot in the future. You hear me? Lots!
 Not brilliant, to be honest… you all caught it. But there is some hope.
 Halves can't get infected. Especially cats. It only works with people… 
 I think you could have become one of ours. You're not limited by a single body. Know what I mean?
 Yeah.
 No.
 Well? What well?
 In the house where Olgimsky's son digged one… We knew about it long ago. Our Halves told us. They sneak around everywhere.
 Why?
 …Well, he deserved it! We thought we'd leave his punishment up to the Earth.
 …Let's not talk about it now.
 If only you knew what was beyond that well…
 Aren't you cold here? Lonely? Sad? Uncomfortable? How do you even survive in the winter…?
 Yeah… those people had no idea. Made rush decisions. Wanted to drag you away from here… Nonsense.
 See how it is here… Fucking trigger-happy idiots. Fucking morons, shooting our own…
 Why?
 If only you could all finish each other off even faster.
 There's a… split. Some follow the general, others follow Longin—the executive officer.\nWhat do you want here? Can't you see we're done for? Huh? <i>Huh?</i>
 Calm down.
 A split? Tell me more.
 …Hands up! I said, raise your hands, now!
 Calm down. I'm leaving.
 I'm a doctor. Put away the gun. Away, I said! There, I'm leaving.
 You paper-pusher… Wake up! I'm a <i>doctor!</i>
 …Show me your teeth one more time, and you'll carry them home in your pocket. Got it?
 Got it.
 What? Children were evacuated?
 Every one of them we could. This morning.
 But how…
 The general assigned several train cars and an artillery engine. That's the kind of man he is.
 …I've heard about him.
 No… but… no.
 You look strange… Cover yourself a bit, maybe?
 What for?
 What do you mean? It's… well, polite to do.
 You'd make a good Herb Bride. They see clothes as a hindrance, too.
 Where did they come from?
 Who?
 So you can see them, too?
 Who are you, kid?
 The bulls. Wake up and look around!
 I don't know.
 From the steppe, apparently. Where else?
 The Earth brought them to life, kid. That's the kind of earth we walk on.
 They're kinda hard to miss! Are they not real? Like a… hallucination?
 Doesn't seem so.
 I hope.
 What <i>are</i> they?
 Aurochs. The bulls of steppe legend.
 Bos Turokh… That's what they call the bull that created the world. I thought he was unique. One of a kind.
 No idea, kid. I'm as bemused as you are.
 All the streets are like… those old tales of yours. Like that book, "Baur Meges." Is this it? Did the steppe flood us all?
 That's the name. "Baur Meges." A tale of the world's creation.
 Perhaps… So Sahba's wish did come true. Or was it her plan?
 Are you scared?
 Scared? Are you nuts? When will I ever see anything like this again?
 Yeah? Well, I am.
 Never again. That much is true.
 What will become of… everything, now? Huh? Come on, tell me! Hey!
 I don't know. Let's walk around… and witness what we've done.
 This is what I wanted, you know. To preserve things almost extinct. Things that would otherwise be ground to dust by time, because tomorrow had no place for them.
 Me? I'm a friend of Sticky's, the kid you let die. You can call me Measly.\nI'm here to give you a tour of the Town. In his place. Oh, how he wished he'd stand here in my place. But he can't.\nYou failed him, so I'll pretend to be him, for you.
 I… I failed him.
 Well… it is how it is.
 Don't. Leave me.
 And he was so proud! Said you took him in as an apprentice. Said you'd make him into a great doctor. You were like a father to him… He'd never seen his real one, anyway. Yeah.
 That's maudlin enough, thank you!
 He was like a son to me, too.
 …
 Fine, I'll not say another word. I don't need to. You'll eat your own heart out for this by yourself, so why bother?\nBetter you tell me: Where did they come from?
 Who?
 I never thought I'd end up here… No matter how hard I tried to get inside, I couldn't. Admittedly, I was pretty scared of this place…
 I'd never been here, either… Until recently.
 So how do you like it?
 This is no place for children. It's antithetical to your world. Kids and beasts… inhabit the opposing ends of the vale of life.
 "The veil of life"? I've only heard the veil of death…
 "Vale." As in "valley."
 Vale of life, veil of death, wails of fate…
 Yeah, it's an odd idiom. I don't know what it means, either. Read it somewhere.
 Thought it was just a factory building. Or storage, maybe. Cold. Hooks, chains, meat smells…
 Those things you describe are in hell. We'll see them, in due time.
 Well, it does smell of meat… Blood, at least.
 It <i>is</i> a factory building.
 And what are those sounds? Is there a beast howling? Or just the wind?
 It's the Earth turning about in her slumber. This place is closest to her.
 There's this pit here… Hell's gate. The howling comes from there.
 Those are the spirits of ancient bulls saying hello. Allow me to translate: "What are these <i>humans</i> doing here? Especially that small one?"
 Ugh. I was asking seriously!
 That was a serious answer.
 Are you still surprised by anything?
 Everything is alive now, kid. So it expresses itself the best it can.
 At first, I thought the steppe couldn't reach this quarter. The Upper Town, the Stone Yard… never welcomed the steppe. It was tough for them here. Too high. Lads used to say worms are best suited to the soil, but this place is all stone and sky.
 It was the Kains' territory. A different town. Ours, but different.
 Just don't call the odonghs "worms" to their face. It offends them.
 You're right. It's strange.
 What face? They <i>are</i> worms. Aren't they? Born of the Earth… Eating Earth, hearing Earth. Earthworms.
 Not exactly. But they are connected to Earth.
 They do have faces. Are they not people to you?
 Is it true that those guys and the Herb Brides have their own language? And their own rites, too? And they marry?
 I don't know. I've never seen it.
 Bullshit.
 It's true, but be quiet. It's not nice to talk about it out loud.
 Why are they here? Why are they all sitting by the Crucible, looking at the Cathedral? What do they care? Did they come to pray?
 Well… times change.
 Pray to what? Time flows differently now. Can you feel it?
 Go over and ask them.
 Like hell… You ask them.
 I think we'd better stay quiet.
 What is there to ask? It's all obvious.
 The Kains said the Cathedral changes time itself. That's why they made it. But who would believe that…?
 Look around. Don't you find it believable?
 They're big talkers.
 Fair enough.
 Anyway, kid. I clearly see what I've done now. I guess it's for the best.
 What <i>have</i> you done?
 Saved all the things that surround us now. They were supposed to be ground down by time, to vanish. But now, they persevere.
 So that's what the doctor's oath was all about. Preserving life. I preserved all living things.
 Well… I made life interesting. It goes on, still as terrible and strange as before. People will have to find new roles in this ecosystem.
 Even the sand pest?
 Yes, kid. Even the sand pest.
 <i>All</i> things.
 
 
 
 Lara's Reflection
 She always had it in her.\nDo you recall? Adults could never see what such a prim and proper girl could want from being in your gang. A daughter to old Captain Ravel! She surely ought to stay ensconced among her books…
 …All the while, she was leaving ammo cartridges on train tracks.
 …All the while, she was catching bugs in jars and observing them.
 …She <i>was</i> proper, though. Carried a book around, sometimes. Was a brilliant distraction while we were busy filling our pockets with stolen candy.
 You see, she puts her stock in deeds and not in words. So Stakh was always close to her; for he would hear his heart, and act. A trait you share, Burakh.
 And the most taciturn of us all, Bad Grief.
 So she's… listening to her heart and acting, huh?
 It's not about a hidden inner fire—but she had real fun with your antics. A lot of your suggestions got a "no" from her—but then, at times, a "yes."
 And then one couldn't dream of a more reliable accomplice…
 I never figured out what she saw in us…
 He speaks so much yet does so much more.
 Can't argue with that.
 Does a lot of stupid things, yes, the ginger clown. But, you were saying…?
 Some things cannot be said with words, but come only with slaps, or bullets, or warming hands, or dripped from waterskins… You know it, sir? This is the only way she can express her grief for her departed father.
 I don't do slaps. But I get it.
 So they'll talk back to her, with bullets! Oh, tenegh…
 You know how much she loved her father.
 In the past tense? Don't you dare. She <i>loves</i> him.
 I do.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 
 
 Oh Lara… I'm not paying enough attention to you. But you'll do fine without me.
 I didn't bother with barrels. Did I make the right choice?
 Oh, the barrels… I didn't deal with them in time. Oh well.
 To hell with the chemist…
 
 I don't believe Saburov has found the real murderer.
 …To hell with the Saburovs. Now is not the time.
 Saburov is the governor. It's not my place to help him—it should be the other way around…
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 I avert my eyes from strangeness.
 I didn't meet Murky's friend.
 Blowing up railroad tracks is the last thing I want…
 Notkin is dead… Should I pay my respects?
 Rubin's business is his own. Meaning, not mine.
 I didn't find Rubin's hideout.
 I'm neither Stakh's mother nor his father. Let him deal with his trouble himself.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things I'll never learn.
 Some things I'll never learn.
 Grief's issues aren't important enough right now.
 Grief… Well, he's always been independent.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 I didn't help Anna.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 The Kin remain split. Perhaps this is how they become people…
 The Kin need no freedom. Beasts belong in a pen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Olgimsky hasn't come to face the Kin.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Daniil Dankovsky, a Bachelor of Medicine.
 I'm surprised his officers even let you near him.
 Why do you all hate me so much? You think I'm a liar? I'm not! I've always had a healing touch!
 And yet today you don't. How convenient.
 People are working here, not taking confessions. Get out.
 I know. Any doctor knows.
 So you're fighting amongst yourselves now… A true outbreak. Worse than the pest…
 We've met.
 I had the strangest feeling some time ago. Did you… want to tell me something, maybe?
 …You've heard me!\nBut I can't speak of it now. It's too important. I'll return home soon. We'll discuss further there.
 So you two have secrets from each other, huh?
 Why are you smiling like that?
 Just imagining your long and happy life together.
 Forget it. Just in a good mood, that's all.
 "Useful," huh? I'll keep that in mind. Maybe I'll get a chance to brag that the Kains' son deems me <i>useful…</i>
 I'm not your errand boy.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 
 
 
 I don't believe Stakh truly takes me for a patricide. He can't be <i>that</i> stupid.
 I missed Stakh yesterday. Should try today.
 Rubin is an idiot.
 I'll be damned… you shaved your head. Preparing to become a monk? Or a soldier?
 State your business.
 Urgent.
 I have an appointment.
 I want to report my progress with the curative serum.
 Stop lying, will you? Tell me straight—what kind of circus is going on here?
 Where's the general? I'd like to examine him and prescribe treatment.
 I'm not authorized to divulge that information. The general is quarantined, and attended to. You can go.
 Wait. How did the general get infected?
 You're a bad liar. Now tell me what you've done to him!
 Quarantined how? The whole fucking Town is infected!
 I cure everyone who is in need. I can help him too. I have the medicine! You hear me?
 But the general isn't.
 What?
 The infection that accumulates inside your body. Checking if you're ready for it.\nIf the world starts to go black before your eyes, escape the infected area before it envelops everything. But if the darkness gives way, that means it's lost interest in you… for now.
 You see interesting dreams, orderly.
 Have you taken twyrine, pal? Oral disinfection, huh?
 You speak as though the disease was a living creature. But it's just a bunch of microbes.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I missed Rubin today, too. Ugh…
 I dreamt of Earth today… I walked barefoot across a cemetery, past bones in spring snowmelt. Why? What was the purpose of my life?
 What was the purpose of your life?
 Is that it? You're giving up?
 Fine, I'm an artist! A circus performer! An equilibrist. Happy now?
 You look unhealthy…
 And I'm a local priest. I'm here for your confession.
 In the old days, they believed circus performers go to hell. Remember?
 I'm from the Caravan. I was with the Caravan!
 Stop saying nonsense.
 Thought so.
 We kidnapped children. Lured them in, turned them into circus freaks. Our maestro even sold some—to anyone who could afford them.\nI suspended myself from the trapeze, enthralling them with my disciplined form, luring them backstage after the performance.
 I've heard of the Caravan. You made the papers…
 Come on, don't slander yourself. You're no equilibrist.
 This plague came after me. It's my punishment. I can't run, can't hide…
 You're not so important that a whole town would be destroyed over you.
 So you hide away in our backwater place, then?
 Yes.
 Is that why you hate dirt?
 Did you harm a lot of kids?
 Quite a lot, but I'm not good at counting. I can't even read.
 Makes sense. Circus performer…
 Well… You'll have to endure hell on your own.
 I don't want to die…
 No one does.
 But you'll have to.
 Then live. Perhaps you'll even make up for what you'd done…
 Come to think of it, we have a lot in common. I reek of misfortune, too. Our whole house does.
 I'm sorry about your loss. You're mourning Simon?
 As expected from Nina Kaina's daughter…
 Today, I dreamt of Earth… I went to a cemetery barefoot, for some reason. I saw human bones in the snowmelt, down below my feet.\nWhy? What was the purpose of my life?
 Huh. Unexpected words from the Kains' heiress…
 You're asking the wrong questions. You've had your life, and that's enough. How old are you, even? Early twenties?
 Simon's gone… Uncle Georgiy can't protect us. Mother is dead. And Father… Ugh, Father.\nAnd me? Who am I? I need to be like Mother, do what she did. Oh, no plague would dare touch us while she lived. She was a true Mistress.
 Just don't follow her directly.
 I never believed in all that Mistress nonsense.
 You never believed? <i>You never believed?</i> Who in this world cares what you believe!\nA Mistress brings to life all that her hands, words, and thoughts touch. Like the ancient king who turned water, bread, and trees into gold. Only, his touch ruined life; a Mistress' touch animates. There's no greater joy.
 How come?
 A Mistress holds a doll in her hands, and it comes to life. The Mistress thinks, and the doll remembers seven generations of its history. The Mistress dreams, and the doll acquires creativity.\nDo you understand now, heavy man reeking of blood and guts?
 I do. Stop shouting.
 Who do you think you are, talking to me as if we are equals?
 A doctor.
 Really?
 A person who has lived longer than you, and seen more.
 This plague came after me… to challenge me. Am I a Mistress yet? But no! I'm not… Ah, what do I do…
 You are a Mistress all right. By blood, if not in spirit.
 Live some more. Perhaps you'll grow into it.
 Nothing. Although… what about working as a nurse?
 I don't want to die…
 Yet at some point, you will.
 So don't. Aren't you a Kaina?
 Neither did Simon. He did truly seem like an immortal man…
 There's a hunt going on, looking for a person with my features.
 
 If you hear the Earth grumble, find the source. Stand still. She will show her roots to the patient.\n\nFeed the roots with blood. She rewards the generous with herbs.
 
 
 If you hear the Earth grumble, find the source. Stand still. She will show her roots to the patient.\n\nFeed the roots with blood. She rewards the generous with herbs.
 
 
 If you hear the Earth grumble, find the source. Stand still. She will show her roots to the patient.\n\nFeed the roots with blood. She rewards the generous with herbs.
 
 
 If you hear the Earth grumble, find the source. Stand still. She will show her roots to the patient.\n\nFeed the roots with blood. She rewards the generous with herbs.
 An outbreak of an odd disease turned everything upside down. I wonder what lies ahead.\n\nTomorrow will be very different from what I expected.
 He's… war… a magic pie… a letter… silken… at gunpoint… BLAM—e… and asph—alt drawings.\nI c-c-can't say—it. Are your wo—rds falling apart… too? Oh. Can it be c-c-contagiou—s?
 No, I'm fi—
 —no. I can't…
 … say all that I…
 want.
 I like new beginnings. Anticipation is the most invigorating part! That's why I was introduced to it so late. Oh well…
 Relatable.
 I got nothing.
 Hunter
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Sahba-ötün's Reflection
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Because you're bitter, and rooted here.
 I'm not bitter.
 No, little girl… I'm a thistle.
 That was surprisingly apt.
 "Bitterroot." Gotta keep that in mind. Lara would love this.
 Want me to tell you a dream I had?
 Go ahead.
 No. I have enough of my own.
 I dreamt of Earth… A cemetery. Not ours—a different one, in a big city.\nI walked through it barefoot. Then I saw them there, in the snowmelt: the bones. I realized they were his beloved bones… Or maybe my own, even… Why? What was the purpose of my life?
 Don't put faith in dreams, daisy. You see all sorts of things in your sleep.
 I think they were your bones, forget-me-not.
 Whose bones were they, bellflower? Your tenant's?
 This plague came after me…
 Really?
 How are you so special?
 So you're all dressed up for it?
 I'm good for nothing. Worthless. I don't know my own purpose. Do you?
 I want to find my calling, and fulfill it. Wait, no… That sounds pompous.
 No, I don't.
 I would have never come back here if I knew.
 I want to find my roots. That's my purpose.
 You really are strange…
 You know… I tried to tell him, but he only laughs it off… I don't want to die! I know I must, but… but I don't want to.
 You must? No, you don't. So don't.
 But you'll have to.
 Dankovsky does that? Well, it's his area of expertise. If he laughs, it must be because you <i>will</i> live forever.
 Father and Simon. What did they have in common?
 
 
 
 
 
 Lara wants to turn her Shelter into a… well,  <i>shelter</i> for the homeless. To do that, she needs a personal water barrel.\n\nI'll need a good excuse to take one—and it's only doable in the Middle Town where a guard could transport it.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 What is a town?
 What do you mean?
 A bunch of houses on a patch of land.
 …What is a town?
 I don't know.
 The Town is dead and empty. Let it all rot…
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 I had less time than I expected.
 Sometimes, a melody can be heard around the Town that only Victoria Olgimskaya and her daughter knew.\n\nTime to tell Capella about my findings.
 
 Herb Bride
 Herb Bride
 
 
 
 
 It keeps running off at the last moment…
 What are you talking about?
 Um… well… thank you.
 So, what about my reward?
 Took you some time to remember the magic words.
 It ran off! Darn it! Why were you all in my way?
 Did it work?
 Oh my. Who turned over the bowl?
 Did you find a lot of items?
 Funny… Yeah.
 Correct. A coffin.
 A coffin, huh…
 Why am I not surprised…
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Khatangher
 Flattering. But I'm afraid the truth is much less fascinating.
 The truth being…?
 You didn't mention Rubin. Why? He's a doctor, too. More than Clara…
 They will, of course, summon Rubin, and me, and the ruling houses. But <i>you</i> will be their pawn. The inquisitors can identify extraordinary people from miles away, like bloodhounds.\nIt wouldn't be wrong to say that I'm no less intelligent than Daniil. And Stanislav is as good a surgeon as you. Still, we'll remain in the background. You will become the pawn.\nTrust me. I've seen them work.
 You're wrong. I'm not special.
 You flatter me.
 How do you plan to smoke in that thing on your face? Isn't it tight?
 Who are you, anyway?
 A doctor.
 A local butcher.
 Just, you know… an herbalist.
 What ugly orders we have… We're artillery, the god of war, commanded by General Block himself. The man's a legend. We were headed to the southern front, but they flung us here to fight the plague, somehow.\nHow do they expect us to fight it? We're not medics, we're artillery!
 Yes, you're artillery. So you'll likely be ordered to level the Town.
 And what about your legendary general?
 Here's our theory: our general, he's a thorn in everyone's side up there. I mean, people love him. He's an honest man. Got a personal code. But in that hornet's nest, honest folks are hated.\nSo The Powers That Be sent us here to get sick and die.
 No. He was sent here to get his hands dirty. You planning to shoot us? Your own people?
 That's possible.
 <i>If</i> there's an order. But the general isn't a butcher. He cares about his people. Still, if he gives an order, we'll follow it, whatever it is.
 Well, at least that was an honest answer.
 He may not be a butcher, but I am. I'll have to figure out what to do.
 Cares about people, huh? Well, we'll see.
 There's all kinds of joy in the world. You're just sheltered.
 Someone is selling a bull here. Only two hundred for a truly honestly talking pet! Deal of the year!\n\nThen again, it's a good healthy bull.
 I'm still curious... who are you, in truth?
 A herbal infusion. Drink to reveal places and events hidden from naked eyes.
 This herbal infusion reveals places and events hidden from naked eyes. But the town is currently quiet. I should try later.
 Everyone's on their own now. Only God is against everyone.
 Evil does destroy itself, it seems…
 Farewell Note
 "We're gone, but our caches stay! We asked jerboas. It's their game now. The jerboas introduced their own rules too. \n\nNyuta and Sleepy Head left shmowders in their Caches. You'd better find and take them, else the jerboas will eat them. Maybe they already have. And shmowders are bad for them!"
 Written by a kid with a trembling hand.
 Hey there, fellow traveler! You're right on time.
 Hey there to you too, fellow traveler.
 The Dead Item Shop is open.
 You may face the same fate, one day. You'll sing a different tune then.
 Why would we want the gaze of The Powers That Be upon us? Nothing for them to see, and the General doesn't need more headaches.\nSuch a death can be chalked up to the plague. We have an order to shoot anyone sick on sight. By nature, the inquisitors are sick people.
 What? Are you serious?
 It's a rumor, but I think it's true. Hard to verify something done so covertly… Hey, why do you care? You need her? You fall in love? Ha.
 Bullshit. Even you boneheads wouldn't dare attack an inquisitor.
 Yes, I need to see her. You have a big mouth.
 Maybe so.
 I'm going to pretend you didn't tell me that.
 Have you lost it? Whose orders were that?
 No one <i>ordered</i> it. You don't understand what's going on? Anarchy. Just hope to escape with your skin.\nOrders… When there's no order, there's no orders. Just some riflemen barging into that Cathedral of yours. That's how things are done now. All we need is a train back home…
 Did you see this happen yourself?
 Like hell you'll get a train. No one leaves. You're all staying here.
 I know what you mean.
 What are you after, big man?
 Happiness, like everyone else.
 A villain.
 An answer to a riddle.
 A cat.
 You uh… You're not planning to eat it, are you?
 The plague.
 Oh… I thought you were chasing the same cat we are.
 Why are you harassing the poor animal?
 I'm not in the cat chasing business. Cats are fast, and I'm clumsy.
 Cats are like that… No catching them unless they want to be caught.
 It's not a regular cat, okay?
 Is there even such a thing as a <i>regular</i> cat?
 Let me guess, it speaks?
 Can it do tricks or something?
 It's a see-through cat, that's what it is.
 Why don't you feed it? You won't see the cat, but you will see the food. Should make it easier to chase down.
 Could be the ghost of a long-dead cat. Leave it be.
 That's a great plan! You sure know a thing or two about cats, don't you?
 Not really. I had a hamster when I was your age. I'm allergic to cats.
 I kept mice and several rats. No cats allowed in the Burakh household.
 Choosing the right bait is half the hunt.
 I wish I knew more about bulls. Mine isn't invisible, but it sure isn't <i>regular,</i> either.
 Sure do.
 So what do we feed it?
 An invisible cat? Probably invisible mice.
 Cat love milk, don't they?
 Try radishes, or some parsley.
 Oh, come on! You don't believe us, do you?
 I'm just kidding. Get some milk, or cream, or whatever…
 Empty promises work best with invisible cats.
 Have you got milk?
 I've got some, though I'd prefer you lot drink it. It's good for your bones.
 I don't believe in cats in general, visible or invisible.
 Oh! Oh! How about a trade? Here, in my pocket… no, no, that's a bone… marbles, bullets… Gah, I need some time to fish it out. \nGo ahead and pour the milk. I'll have it out by then.
 Stop fidgeting, I'm not in a rush.
 I can handle that…
 It's a deal.
 Not a drop. I'm not a cat, am I?
 Can you get us some? Not much, just a bottle. I've got something really special for you if you do. Rare stuff, you won't find any on your own. \nFill the bowl and the treasure is yours, fair and square.
 All right, I'll see what I can do.
 No can do, kids. Food is getting scarce. You should catch a bird instead.
 You're welcome.
 Here you go. It's inside the box. We call it Burnie.
 Burnie?
 Burnie.
 So what is Burnie good for?
 Why do you call it that?
 I dunno.
 So what do I do with it?
 Not sure… It's one of the last shmowders. Old and powerful stuff. If you get really sick, you must gobble it up in one go, and then… and then…
 And then what?
 All of it? Should I eat the box, too?
 And then toss it over my shoulder with a prayer. Got it.
 You'll see, it'll work out somehow. There you go. \nAll right, gang, back to the plan! Thanks for the help, uncle. You can go.
 Just like that?
 You're making too much noise. It won't come around while you're here. You should leave, and we'll wait in ambush, all quiet and such.\n<i>Here, kitty kitty, here, furry feet, here's a tasty little snack for you to drink and eat…</i>
 Good luck. Give me a shout when you're ready to tackle the black cat in a dark room.
 Thanks. I think this might come in handy.
 Let's go, Burnie. These kids can handle themselves.
 Great ambush. You should get yourselves a trumpet, just to be sure.
 Oh, come on! How hard is it to grab a cat that's drinking milk? This is easy stuff! You know, fellas? We're done! I'm done running with you.
 You make it sound like it's my fault that it ran off.
 Yeah, it is! You scared it with all your stomping around, that's what happened! Can't you just walk on your toes for a minute?
 I just wanted to take a peek.
 Now I get why the cat's invisible—it vanishes when you try to look at it. Clever.
 Whatever.
 Calm down, kid. Your first try didn't work out—big deal. Try again.
 It's that inquisitor woman. She made herself a nest in the Cathedral, and here's the result! That's why time runs faster now. And it's denser…
 Why?
 Right, all trouble comes from emissaries. Anything's wrong, blame 'em.
 Yeah, they have guns.
 Should have looked at the flask and helped himself to the rifle. Would've worked out better.
 The front is here now, the most important one.
 Everyone is scared.
 No, it's not. The stork will deliver some more.
 They'll be back. You'll see. And more will come.
 One more stash…
 Twyrine won't purge the disease from the inside—even antibiotics won't.
 That's not what I meant.
 What did you mean, then?
 Drink twyrine, and your legs will carry you to small stashes. Hidden in old, broken furniture lying around the street, and such…\nSometimes, there's small boxes in those stashes, filled with powder. If you eat it, you'll get well. There's been a few cases already. Honest.
 Honest? Like hell. You need to get hammered to find a trunk in a yard?
 Those are kids' caches. They have… well, they <i>had</i> this game.
 "Shmowders." I know. They can kill you.
 No need to get <i>hammered,</i> that's undignified. Only, twyrine… it <i>leads</i> you. To salvation. To those tiny boxes.
 I think you need some sleep, pal. That's your salvation.
 Oh, it leads you all right, just not in a straight line.
 That's what <i>I</i> meant, though. Go breathe on someone else.
 Sure… Anything could happen.
 The Town can hear you. Walk slowly. Move quietly. You hurt it.
 Are you drunk?
 I know.
 I want to know more about Father, Judge. About his friendship…
 What is a town?
 An organism.
 A town is a process. It's movement. More often than not, it's slow and aimless, town creeping across the land like an oil stain.\nWe wanted to make a town that would grow upwards. Quickly. Purposeful.
 And what would be its purpose?
 In this town, people can make the impossible—if they're capable, of course. For it is a machine. A border-breaking machine.
 Meaning…?
 You refer to your family, but you're not this town's only builders.
 No, but we are its planners and designers. We shape it.\nThe merits of the three families are inarguable. We live in harmony, even as we pull in different directions—sometimes, commoners mistake that for adversity. Each family does its job. Each is irreplaceable.
 The other two at least make this town habitable.
 Still, tell me about Father. He was friends with your brother, wasn't he?
 I <i>am</i> telling you about them. If you're too impatient to hear the answer, I'm not holding you here.
 I apologize for my impatience.
 What work does this machine do, I wonder?
 Are people machines to you, too? Like, machines that produce ideas?
 No. People are mere infants, yet to even climb from their cribs. Larvae on the verge of transformation.\nA town is a process. A human is a process. Pointed up and forward, unlike what some would have you think. Past a certain age, certainly, our mind begins to degrade. Why is that?
 Such is our nature.
 The body dictates its laws.
 At least the other two pull it back to the ground.
 See the Polyhedron?
 The Tower on the other side of the river?
 No, my friend. That's the issue. It's not yet on the other side, and that is quite symbolic.
 What do you mean?
 Just like a person, the Town is a process. It grew. From ancient times, imprinted upon the neolithic Abattoir; from the ancient steppe upwards, towards the Gorkhon.\nNow it finds itself pressed against the river—a border. The Town has faced its limit, unable to move forward, unless we do the impossible.
 Well… maybe we're fine as we are now?
 It pushes people.\nTo do the impossible. To save themselves from drowning by pulling themselves up by their own hair. To force butterflies from their sad shells. To step over, break, overcome boundaries—of thinking and sensing, first and foremost. The limits of their conception of the world.
 You're insane…
 The time has come for us to cross to the other side. Even the Polyhedron, defying the law of gravity—one of the most binding architectural laws—is <i>still</i> not there. It stands on an island between the two banks.\nIt is a bridge. We've raised our foot over the abyss, but have yet to step forward. Frozen in the middle, we are. Still, this is a lot.
 Why are you doing all this?
 Bullshit. This is bullshit, Judge!
 This is what my brother and your father used to talk about. This is the core of their friendship, if you will! Isn't this what you wanted to know?
 It is.
 Is that so…
 This tower proves that any limit can be challenged.\nWe currently believe death is inevitable, just as we once believed human flight to be impossible. But people achieved it, and crossed unimaginable distances. This tower triumphs over the law of earth.
 So this is what Father and Simon used to talk about…?
 The Polyhedron isn't especially pretty… Are you sure it had to be built?
 How does it… remain there?
 Without magic, believe me. Limits can be challenged without miracles; all you need is will and imagination. \nThe rest is technicalities that you're unlikely to understand. Or are you an engineer? Have you studied structural loads?
 No. Not interested in engineering.
 They used to discuss the Town, its change and direction. They argued.\nI don't know what your father believed in. Simon… won't tell us anything, not anymore. But I've explained his ideas to you.
 Thank you, Judge. That would be enough.
 I won't pretend that I support them.
 I understand. I truly do now.
 But people don't fly on their own. We use machines.
 And death is not overcome in bodily form, else we'd all turn into horrendous struldbrugs, tortured by dementia and feebleness. It was in a certain adventure book, sort of.
 Thank you. I've seen books before, you know.
 How is death overcome, then?
 Perhaps this outbreak will give us an answer.\nDeath comes to those who devolve. Dullness is death. Fading is death. Only constant development of the self can overcome death.
 Ah. You have one answer for everything. The Kain answer.
 Was there anything else you wanted to know?
 What Father and your brother had in common, of course. Judging by your words, no two people could be more different…
 Bayarlaa, we're settling here. Most ventured deep into the steppe. Some fetch kindling; some draw water. They won't be back soon.
 Are there any sick among you?
 Wise.
 So you've split up? Isn't that forbidden?
 You're joking, esegher; I can see the lines of laughter in the corners of your eyes. How have we split? We walk the same ground. No walls, no enmity between us. Mother Boddho caresses our step.
 She caresses our step everywhere.
 I am joking, yeah. Be khara, is everyone healthy here?
 Everyone's healthy, esegher. The air is clean and light here.
 Light, my ass. My head's already aching from the scent of swevery…
 Bayartay, Kindred. It's good to see you all safe.
 Well, me, Rekka, Rita, Sleepy Head… All of us who are there already.
 Why did you shout?
 Why did you shout?
 What lies have you fed to him?
 Barin from the Skinners, that's certain. He hunted us with a knife afterwards, 'cause we'd seen him! For real!\nPerhaps he did your Old Man in too? Whaddyathink?
 …No. He's not <i>the</i> murderer. And you are a bunch of two-faced punks.
 That was an ugly and dirty thing to do. You should have just asked me directly.
 And? Like you'd do anything to help us! You've got a ton on your plate already.
 I might have.
 You did a dirty thing. Who could ever believe you, after this?
 I trusted you…
 Well, what did you think? That we're a bunch of angels?
 I need to rethink something.
 I was thinking you had some kind of conscience.
 I treated you as equals this whole time. Clearly I shouldn't have.
 Well, we won't direct this play, that's for sure. But I was talking about what awaits us inside.
 Guess we'll have to accept our fate, whatever it is.
 Inside? That's not a performance, just a run-through. Meaning she'll probably run each of us through with something sharp.
 I don't think so.
 What bird story?
 That's what they used to call these… special people. They had a particular way of spreading false information through a kind of… reflection. She invented the process, Aglaya Lilich.\nNo matter. But just that after that, she was blacklisted by the Powers That Be. Several people got purged from the government, too.
 So you know her?
 Wow…
 You'll see. Do you think she'll appreciate our Polyhedron?
 She must.
 I wasn't the one who built it. It was Farkhad, may his soul rest in peace.
 Why do you hate her so much?
 No.
 Agreed.
 I wonder how you'd withstand an interrogation.
 You know… It's beginning to grow on me.
 She drinks a lot of milk.
 What do I care?
 "She" who, Reflection? Your master?
 She sips water from the roots now. She's dead.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Not dead, but back to Earth that cast her clay. That's what we are, we Kin. Our Mother Boddho, our Earth, will grant us one more birth. As twyre, as swevery, white whip, bodies or odonghe…\nKholboön, you speak as if born yesterday.
 Why are you here? A person's reflection dies with them.
 Know you what death is, yargachin? The rot that takes a body within Earth? You call that death? You jest, nynehen zayla…
 She was born of Earth, then? And will return from Earth?
 No one knows how she became herself.\nSuspicion and fear surround a tale of one who left the steppe. She's said to be inhuman, a doll of clay and bone: Shabnak-adyg.
 Yeah, right.
 There is blood in her veins.
 The same can be said of Earth. So what?
 Those are mere legends.
 My master waits for her assigned time.\nFive years ago, during the First Outbreak, Earth cast her with a secret task that must have been fulfilled back then.
 Are you saying that…
 No.
 The First Outbreak was curbed by your father, however. With vicious force he changed the flow of history.\nAnd Sahba-Usptae, Sahba-ötün, the one called Aspity by common folk, stayed behind within this world. A groomless bride, a blemish, lost, estranged from her true goals. Believes she owes her life to Isidor, who made her, who foresaw her…
 What do you mean, "made" her? What nonsense is this?
 I like her. She is… an abgai. A sister to me. I feel her care.
 She feigns humanity quite well, and holds respect and power in the Kin.\nShe rules over this hiding-place, where steppe folk can find escape from being yoked within Olgimsky's cruel mill. Here they can hide, and heal, and run their midnight markets…
 It's not funny, Reflection!
 Are there many such steppe people?
 The Kin respect our Sahba, although they fear her, too. But they rely on her protection. And she's their exegete, interpreter of ancient lore. Through her, the Kin remember their rites, their speech, themselves.\nThey know it not, of course; to them, she is a flame, and they are moths.
 So what? What use is any of that now?
 "Exegete?" I don't think I even know that word.
 Your father, whom she worships without understanding, meant the Kin to merge into the Town to make a body whole. But we cannot, and will not!\nSo she decided to adjust the Town to the needs of the Kin. She brokers work for brides and odonghs, setting them up as dancers or couriers.  One wonders why?
 …You're trying to take over the Town. You madmen!
 She doesn't know what she's doing.
 Indeed. She is not human, after all. But love does drive her, like it drives… you. And love is blind and foolish…
 Not always.
 Not human. Right. I'll try to accept that.
 You're lying. She <i>is</i> human. I can tell.
 Yes.
 The Kin are slaves, Reflection. Beasts. Have been such for many years.
 So she's not human? I don't believe you.
 Not slaves, but a hydra of apathy. They do not care for freedom, for self, or dignity, like you might value.
 So you're saying she was born five years ago? The First Outbreak…
 Enough. Enough to flood the Town.
 Do-Gooder
 It's forbidden for Herb Brides to have footwear: it's believed they speak with Earth through their rhythmic footsteps. Winter must get cold…
 Offer protection from contaminated air. Not the best, but they do their job.
 It should be noted that whoever came up with the idea of selling random pieces of cloth as "cloaks" has a very keen and shameless business sense, and I think I know who…
 A piece of rough cloth. Can be used as a protective cover against infection during contact… somewhat.
 <i>"How does one call upon menkhu, the faithful of the Kin? Know them by their hands, for they are butchers…"</i>
 Do they even protect against infection, or do they just absorb it, making you a carrier?
 This mask resembles those worn by medical personnel, but instead of sterile gauze, it's made of dirty cloth, and instead of clinging tightly to my face, it hangs loose. Frankly, it's just a rag with two ties.
 A basic item that covers the face and protects against plague clouds… somewhat.
 A ridiculous mixture of random pills cures sand pest.\n\nMaybe it's because the plague itself is a combination of many diseases? It attacks every organ, every Layer, and changes every day.
 A box filled with powder made of assorted ground pills. Extremely harmful, but somehow cures sand pest.
 Master says you're doing well. He said, "With each hour, fewer and fewer people think he's the murderer." He said, "Tell him that I want to talk; let him come to the Lump." Right away.
 Your "Master"?
 Since when do people have masters in this town, boy?
 What for?
 Big Vlad.
 Ah, Olgimsky. What does he want with me?
 If he's summoning you, you must go. "No dawdling," he said.
 True. If Big Vlad calls, you come.
 I'll come by when I can. You tell him that.
 If he needs me so much, let him come to me.
 Don't you know? We all have but one true master since the Factory was built.
 Perhaps Olgimsky wants me in his service as well?
 We'll see about that.
 Perhaps he does.
 Won't be easy for him.
 What does he want?
 Master says you need protection. He said, "I don't think he's the killer." He said, "Tell him that I want to talk; let him come to the Lump." Right away.
 Who's your master?
 Right away, huh? Well who am I to refuse such a thoughtful and polite invitation?
 Since when do people have masters in this town, boy?
 Messenger
 
 Messenger
 "Death's but a word. A collection of letters. We only need it to keep us unnerved." What does that mean for us?
 What does that mean for us?
 What does that mean for me?
 "I don't suppose it's about to get better. But just deserts are about to get served."
 Go. Act. From now on, I will watch you with genuine interest. You were clearly doing this on purpose; meaning you must beginning to understand.
 To be honest… No, it wasn't on purpose.
 That's it. There's nowhere else to go.\nYou're still trying—that deserves respect. If you can figure out how to overcome death even now, burdened with all possible limits in a world completely mangled and rotten, then it was all worth it.
 That's the first time you've said something nice to me.
 The door opens…
 …And I walk out.
 …But the lodger stays.
 …Cold and fear await outside.
 …And an ocean is heard.
 …Close it back, please!
 …Say hello to me.
 I was thinking about taking away your hands.\nIt's a useful limitation. Actors shouldn't flail around—they even tie their hands behind their backs, sometimes. That encourages development of better facial expressions, body language… ingenuity, in general.
 Hands? No! Not my hands!
 So take them away from your actors. I'm not one—didn't I tell you?
 I'd like to see you try.
 You can't do anything to me. You're awful funny…
 I'm not a fan of displaying affection. If it's present, it shows.
 No.
 Well, no means no.
 Hunger it is, then…
 You try being in my shoes…
 <i>…Oh, the famine and the fever! Oh, the wasting of the famine!</i>
 I'll just have to keep an eye out for bread, then.
 And let me remind you: Your health continues to dwindle. Well, such are the rules. With each new mistake, every time you come to this stage…
 …This is no stage. It's the gallows.
 The last thing I need…
 Right. I… forgot about that.
 You'll become exhausted quicker. Will probably have to sleep more. And Sleep in the brother of Death. It diminishes… not your life, maybe, but the number of times you can act and influence the world.
 Only the number of actions, not their importance.
 It diminishes my life, too.
 Quite so. Oh, and don't forget that…
 Yeah, yeah. Every time I die, my life force dwindles. I remember.
 How could I forget…
 That's all right. It's my burden. I can bear it.
 Tell yourself: I'm exhausted, I can't take it anymore. Feels natural, doesn't it? This admission could save your life. Take pity on yourself and stop in time.
 No. It's not my style.
 As a doctor, I agree. All organisms need rest.
 No. One can't admit that. You must work yourself to death, period.
 Ugh, I've always hated this kind of person! They lie that they can do whatever's needed… then they fall, exhausted, at a critical moment!
 Such a paradox! To admit you're tired—is that a step towards death? A surrender? An admission of your natural limits? Or is it a step back to whatever happens before death?\nWhat is real life?
 Food for thought.
 To overcome weakness, one must acknowledge it. Wouldn't you agree?
 A step towards death. I think I understand.
 What about all those stories teaching us that resignation and acceptance sometimes lead to the true victory?\nMany wise men took exhaustion as a sign that death was a gift. Immortality is the curse of incurable exhaustion.
 It's a different kind of exhaustion. The spiritual kind.
 It's true.
 I'd rather not think about it. It's the healthiest way.
 The monologue of a madman who considers people to be mere actors in his show, and himself their sole director.
 Your actors might confuse precious items with trash. I won't.
 Where once existed living tissue, you'll now find death.\nYou don't believe me, though. You think I'm just trying to scare you, that it's all make believe to me. You've hinted at that more than once.
 Of course I don't believe you.
 Everything is living. Everything is alive.
 I don't "hint." I'll tell you outright that I don't believe you.
 No. It doesn't work anymore. You're not curing anyone; you're curing the wrong people in the wrong place in the wrong way!
 Who should I cure?
 Where should I cure them?
 How should I cure people?
 Search! That's the point of the exercise! It's not my place to tell you! I'm just a prompter giving hints.
 I've had enough of you.
 Yeah? Well, I'll tell you. What I consider alive will be alive. Got that?
 I'm out of here.
 There will be blood.
 <i>Baur Meges,</i> the holy tale of the Kin, does speak of the <i>self</i> as poison. It rises and bellows: "Me!"\nDiscord soon follows, then blood. Calamities, fear.\nYou've seen it all a couple days ago.\nWe do not have this. We are a whole.
 You're saying some frightening things.
 There is some merit to that.
 Then it was a hunch. In any case, you've become an interesting subject—finally! Both you and your idea of Artemy Burakh. So act.
 I hope I never see you again.
 It's always been worth it.
 No… It wasn't.
 I guess I am.
 I still don't understand a thing.
 Well… watch me, I guess.
 Nothing changed. You're imagining it.
 The actor must understand how to work death. I'm not making this one for the audience, but for the actors themselves. <i>Their inner world</i> is the stage. Their worldview.\nHence the… unusual methods. Unusual and rough. It's the theatre of cruelty.
 Just how rough are we talking here?
 Look, I do what the subject demands of me. I'll set your tasks gradually and uncover the method step by step—else you'll sabotage the process.\nYou're here for an audition, after all, aren't you?
 Me? No. I'm just curious.
 I'm not an actor. From what I can tell, I'm one of the people your actors will play. A person directly involved in the events.
 Sure.
 Curious. But I'm not interested in costumes.\nI'm interested in showing the authentic relationship of man and death. Stage props are unneeded for that; what one needs is a method.
 What method?
 No one does. Old theatre is dead. The building we're standing in is just a shell of a theatre. A cocoon, an abandoned chrysalis, hell, maybe even a coffin, should the play be a flop.\nYou know, the world's a stage—I've truly taken that to heart.
 What play are you staging?
 What do you mean?
 So, you don't have much stage property? This place looks empty.
 On time?
 Today is a special day. A Day Backwards. Usually, I collect dead things; today, I sell unborn ones.
 What do you mean?
 "Sell"? As in, for money?
 Today, yes.
 Huh. So what do you sell?
 I thought rag-and-bone people had no use for money.
 In general, we don't. But money is about to become a dead thing, too. I'm preparing.
 So what do you sell?
 I have these bits of paper, see? Candy wrappers. Absolutely useless. You can't do anything with them.\nI'm selling them for money. Today only. And they're expensive, too.
 Why the hell would I want to buy candy wrappers for money?
 …You're saying frightening things.
 "Unborn things," huh… So they're useless now, but that could change?
 That, I will not explain.\nPerhaps this is my attempt to save you, fellow traveler, giving away diamonds for the price of sugar. Or maybe I'm trying to swindle you, as befits a merchant. Or it's all just a prank. Who knows? Not you.
 So explain like a normal person!
 You like blind deals, don't you?
 The stakes are your fate, fellow traveler. You're sewn to yours with a double seam. Meaning, you can do anything—fate won't let you go astray. Even if you don't yet understand the meaning of your actions.\nListen! What does Fate whisper? Should you take my candy wrappers?
 It whispers, "Don't waste your time on old buffoons."
 Doing things blindly… Yeah, that's my style.
 Are you suggesting we're still playing back on the train? That's an unnerving thought…
 I never thought you were a believer, General.
 I wasn't until yesterday.
 What do you mean?
 Yeah… the way things are going, we don't have much left besides faith.
 Who are you?
 Artemy Burakh.
 Anna Angel
 Anna Angel
 Maera
 Amahn
 Artemy
 Hюmhan
 Isidor
 Khooloy
 Ushkhaan
 SHADY SHOP
 In this shop, even outcasts can buy food.
 In this shop, food is still sold for money.
 VICTORIA'S TRACE
 A melody plays here now.
 Back again, Burakh? Hmph… like a shuttle in a weaver's loom…
 Your son is going to the Termitary.
 
 Bite kharaan, you want to take our Mother? You cannot have her. We won't let you. She won't let you.
 I <i>am</i> taking her. Try and stop me.
 Fine, fine.
 Would you lead us, then? Rule us wisely, by the Lines? Hear the bellowing of Mother Boddho? Protect us from harm, eradication?
 Maybe.
 No. But I want to help you.
 Who are you to give us orders? You're not our ruler.
 You need no rulers.
 Shudkher! Do you really see yourselves as a herd in need of a shepherd?
 We need parents, aba ezhe. We are a family, a Khatanghe. Your father's dead. Tycheek's dead. You refuse to take your father's burden.\nYet we have our Mother. We won't give her up.
 I'm trying to become whatever Father was!
 You're not children! And you don't need a ruler.
 We are the Khatanghe, the Kin. We obey strength. As long as Fat Vlad rules over us, we belong to him. When he dies, we'll listen to another. To you.
 So that's what you meant…
 While the mare carries a rider, it will turn wherever he pleases. Is that what you mean?
 Baygalday. I won't have it.
 Then help us break free.
 How?
 We cannot obey you, emshen. Even if we wanted to.
 Why?
 Did you not hear what our Mother said? A head cannot be taken from its body. She can't leave this place without us. We won't let her go to certain death with a stranger. A body is whole.
 I'm not a stranger.
 Be khara, my own people are destroying themselves… You deserve it!
 You are a stranger until proven otherwise. Your deeds are that of a stranger. Medenegshe, you are not part of us.
 What proof do you need?
 I am part of you.
 Show us that you're on our side. Show us that your knife can trace the Lines. Show us that you can cut.\nBring us Big Vlad. A weakling cannot do that. Then we will listen.
 Stop pushing!
 By oylgono ugyb. I don't understand what you mean.
 You want blood… Why is it always blood?
 Hey doctor, you got a leash? I <i>really</i> need one.
 Why would I have a leash?
 How about a tourniquet? It kinda looks like one.
 Anyway, doctor! You got a leash or not?
 I might have one.
 I'm not just asking randomly. I'll trade it for a shmowder. A real, working one! It cures the plague! I totally checked!\nWe don't need shmowders in the Tower anyway—it's free from infection. But you could use one. It's not like there's any other use for the leash. For you, it's just a piece of leather. For me, it's destiny!
 A shmowder, huh? Let's trade, then.
 I don't have a leash, but don't go far. If I ever find one in my pocket, I'll bring it to you.
 And I'm not staying. Goodbye.
 She's not dead? Are you implying she could come back to life?
 Yes and no. Your thoughts are stiff and narrow. You find that life and death are incompatible.\nOne can still feel her breath and catch a glimpse of her reflection. Her future still remains unsaid, and I will speak of her as if she was alive.
 Fine… I'll play along. Out of respect.
 Khan! I've finally found you. My father had a list…
 ...of children he took a particular interest in, yes. He considered us this town's future.\nYou've inherited that list. Capella told me.
 It means I'll take care of you.
 There's no need. The Polyhedron protects me.
 That's not up to you.
 Miracles work best in conjunction with actual pills.
 Fine. My father had a list…
 Well, the twin is dead, too.
 …A double?
 Stellar job, Dora. Brilliantly done.
 I mean… she distributes bread from here… like, if your house got burned, or you want to escape quarantine. Means anyone can come in. She doesn't lock the door, either. The Shelter <i>is</i> a shelter.\nAnd now she asked for someone to replace her.
 She did find a way to serve the people, after all… So why does she need replacement?
 But <i>who was executed?</i> Tell me, now!
 Like you don't have a more cheerful subject… Say, life.
 It's one and the same. Especially considering my new method.
 Killing actors for real?
 Intricate.
 What's the point?
 Is the outside not cruel enough for you?
 It's a different kind of cruelty, not the one you're used to. Being unforgiving towards yourself, mostly… but you need not concern yourself with this…
 Why?
 Fine. "Death is never quick. Understanding is a process. Unpleasant, but unavoidable." 
 Loud and clear… It's a miracle you're not in jail.
 Such as?
 Are you unfamiliar with the word? The world you're acting in changes with each… ahem… stage death of our hero. Forever.\nEven if we had a chance to trick time, go back, and start over from a turning point, the consequences of death would remain.
 So what happens next?
 I'm not an actor, I'm a doctor. You seem to have confused me with someone.
 Bravo! Great job! Keep up that demeanor!
 What demeanor?
 Be my guest and complain to Saburov. But I think he's busy with bigger things than judging the ethics of my creative endeavors.
 What are you up to?
 Whatever… then someone else will replace you. Next!
 What kind of consequences were you talking about?
 Yeah. You act. I'll go and do my job.
 Why are you doing this?
 Bullshit. Act all you want, but you're not some sorcerer who can actually do that to a person.
 Didn't I make it clear enough that clocks won't help you?\nA clock is just a point from which a successor begins. But they still carry their predecessors' mistakes. Else we'd never solve this riddle!
 What is your goal, anyway?
 What riddle?
 I'll explain it to your successors, if you fail… Clearly those will be beyond help anyway, those third-rate phonies, so I'll have to spell everything out to them. Wonderful…
 You're a dangerous man, Mark Immortell. Is that a last name or a nickname, by the way?
 You're a curious person. You make me regret I'm a surgeon, not a psychiatrist.
 Enough gossip.
 A random applicant. Can I have this role?
 Good. Your life force has dwindled. It will dwindle even further with each new death… If you're not scared, act.
 Anything else?
 Is this real? Then no… I don't want to be part of this.
 But you already are. You take part in it with every breath, every word, every moment of your life.
 So what's my new… limitation?
 We're meeting for the first time. Although, you do have some features in common with your predecessor.
 For the first time? What do you mean? Who are you?
 I'm an impresario. I only hire actors, that's all. When one of you dies, I handle the replacement.
 Well, the previous rehearsal was… unsuccessful. So now we play rough. There's more malice in the world—this will not, cannot change.\nAdversity makes people <i>strive.</i>
 If the goal of your play is to overcome death, the invincible foe, why make that more difficult?
 To avoid complacency! Complacency <i>is</i> death. It will drag you into the abyss—the very abyss we're trying to overcome.
 So how do you intend to do this?
 Because I don't care about your emotions—only your understanding. If the actor understands how to work with death, so will others. Like me.\nDon't worry, though: in truth, what you see out there is a stage, too. It's also a model, like the one in the background behind me.
 Spare me this cheap philosophy. You may call it a stage; to me, it's life.
 And some supposed real life waits on the other side? Screw you. I'm in no rush to kick the bucket.
 What do you want?
 What do I want? A good play. No one's ever staged this one before.\nYou must break away from your limits—I'm interested in that, too. Push the limits of a theatrical stage, of drama, of form. Push the actor beyond their role. The play itself, beyond this sorry theatre.
 In that, our goals align.
 Please don't think that it's about capturing agony. I'm not the kind to burn models alive in an attempt to write truthful suffering.\nMy interests lie elsewhere. It's not about cruelty, or the inevitability of the end. The triumph of death… All of that is only a reason, an excuse.
 Then what is your play about? Me?
 Undoubtedly. It's about the person. The actor.
 I'm not an actor! I'm Artemy Burakh, in the flesh. Open your eyes, clown!
 I need different actors to continue the same path, each starting where the previous died, so their interpretation of the character carries on.\nHere's my question: When does the actor become the character?
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 That's it. There's no one here anymore. The Theatre is closed, we're all sick of it. Literally nauseated.
 Closed? How?
 You're a reflection.
 The sand pest defies its own rules. It's about to infect all of my kids, and there's nothing I can do about it.
 Sick? Why?
 Clearly not closed well enough, since you're here anyway. But everyone else is gone.
 Where?
 The dog-headed ones. Khan's army. They live in the Tower. Are you all right in the head, uncle?
 It's just… Notkin's lot could also be called that, couldn't they? They have bonds with their animals. Don't they get confused about sides?
 Got it. So is there some trouble?
 Not at all. The Soul-and-a-Halves get half a soul more, and the Dogheads get half a head. Not even remotely similar.
 Fair enough. So what happened at the Dogheads' place?
 Other people are reluctant to talk now, too. No one want to touch others anymore, not even with words.
 Worst thing is, they do have corpsmen. The huge guys with boxes on their backs? They burn the sick. So let them! But why do we, the living, have to suffer? Why do they need to level the Town?
 You can't hide from death under a pile of corpses.
 They burn the sick? Better to avoid them, then.
 The sick are still alive, too.
 You won't tell her anything.
 Because the director went out for a smoke—four hours ago. Anyone would get sick from smoking a cigarette that long. And he took the coat!
 Is he, like… gone gone?
 Why?
 How should I know? I'm a junior prop designer, no one reports to me. But the Theatre is empty now. Do not come back.
 So there won't be anymore pantomimes at night?
 I'm afraid I will return.
 Pantomimes? Oh, pantomimes… No, there will still be pantomimes. They're <i>there,</i> you see. I'm talking about <i>here.</i>
 So that's what the fellow traveler took from me… Philosophy discussions. Could have been worse.
 Seems like you had a lot on your plate recently… and I don't even know what it was about.
 See how it turned out? I came back, but you… seem to be leaving.
 Thieves rarely take a single coin. They usually grab the whole purse. Just saying.
 You're saying the talks with the director aren't the only thing I've lost? What have I gotten myself into…
 I'm not greedy.
 Tourniquet your clever ass, will you? I need an actual leash, a Soul-and-a-Half one.
 Why would I have a leash?
 You mingle with Notkin's pack. Everyone's seen that. So I was thinking, maybe they gave you one already? That would kinda make you a Soul-and-a-Half yourself… So then it's not deception, I think.\nThe Soul-and-a-Halves are like that. They got no standards, and just accept anyone who comes to them. Maybe even you.
 No one's a Soul-and-a-Half until they've got a Half.
 So who do you plan to deceive? I mean, <i>not</i> deceive?
 Thank you, kind girl.
 We Dogheads have order. We're not a pack, but an organization. There are watchdogs, shepherd dogs, service dogs, hounds… even guide dogs. The ones who go <i>in.</i>\nAnyone can become anything if they try! Not like <i>that</i> lot, completely dependent on what pet chooses you. What if it's a frog? Or a cockroach? Anyway, those Halves of theirs don't even exist!
 "Go in"? What?
 Up the Tower. I mean, down the Tower. I mean, forget it. I misspoke.
 Fine. So why do you need a leash?
 What about you? Are you a watchdog? A hound?
 So why do you need a leash?
 I'm almost a hound. All I need is one more leash. It's a test… to show how many Soul-and-a-Halves I've defeated. Get it? Battlefield glory!
 And the leashes are, of course, taken from lifeless bodies of your foes.
 You're a tough bunch.
 It's not like we tear off fingers! They got crates of leashes in the Warehouses, and make more. Chara takes one from Gray every week.\nPlus, we don't <i>have</i> to take them by force. Diplomacy and deception are also viable options.
 You commander isn't in the Polyhedron. He's over there. Is that fine?
 You're a downright saint.
 Sounds more like a tracker than a hound.
 Makes it even easier to deliver the loot. He's the leader, anyway.
 Akela never misses, huh?
 Loyalty is commendable.
 No. A leash is a symbol of trust. And I won't trade away trust.
 Death is everywhere these days.
 You can carry me into the infection, but not out? And the air won't drive you down, even though it's still infected? Sounds fishy.
 Why are you standing here, then?
 We are Children of Boddho, Burakh the menkhu. Half-Earth, half in the Earth. The plague cares not for us.
 What am I supposed to do now?
 The plague accepts everyone, and lets go of no one.\nPerhaps our boats refuse to travel infected water. Or maybe those are just words. Maybe we simply do not want to spread infection.
 This is a sensible argument. Why didn't you say so from the start?
 When one talks sense, they get begged and bribed. But what use would it be to bribe monsters in magic boats?
 All right… What do I do now?
 Go back on foot, menkhu. The plague is the Earth. One cannot escape it by water.
 Like I have a choice.
 You'll still carry it on your own skin.
 Your speech is very clear, too. A real townsperson, aren't you…
 Hope I can make it…
 Something bad happened to you, Cub. You got sick, I think. Our dogs found you on the ground.
 Have I fainted?
 The air was all black…
 It's emission from the Factory. \nDad says they only used to pollute the water, but now the air's poison too, and life is suffering, and the Pig is a bloodsucker and worse.
 And Mom?
 Well, he's not wrong…
 Mom says nothing. Just keeps praying. Aunt Dora said she saw the same stuff five years ago.
 Five years ago, huh…
 Well. Thanks for rescuing me.
 What happened to me?
 Aren't you a bit too young to play with Notkin's gang?
 Why?
 
 
 
 
 I don't know.
 I see you have a question.
 Yeah. It doesn't make sense. So each new death brings me closer to defeating it?
 What do you mean, "each new death"? We're not in a fairy tale, people don't come back to life. And what do you mean by "defeating"?
 Then how…
 How is death overcome? Not defeated, mind you, but <i>overcome?</i>\nI told you already. Many times. By changing the attitude. Who dies? What dies? A person? What is a person? Their memory of personal experience? Others' memories of them? A personality, a body, a soul?
 A body.
 Remember the Kains' method: to solve the unsolvable, redefine the conditions.\nWhy do you think there's only one body? My stage experiment proves Artemy Burakh can have several. Bodies die, the person remains.
 How?
 Like a photon piercing several holes at once, a person doesn't equal their physical shell. A person is… <i>distributed.</i>\nDistributed among many attempts, bodies, versions, interpretations.
 What photon?
 A particle. Small objects can be particles and waves at the same time.\nNext to catastrophic events, a person is a tiny particle, so that rule applies to them, too. They think they're a particle, but they're a wave.
 I think you should discuss that with Dankovsky…
 Goddamn it… Another applicant for this cursed role.
 Yeah, sign me up.
 Why is it cursed?
 I guess. But they're strictly forbidden to interact with them.\nThat'd ruin the whole experiment. The prototypes would learn they're being played, act unnaturally, aspire above their station… You know.
 Wait. The actor follows a set path, repeating the prototype's actions. Right?
 I understand, yeah.
 It's unwise to argue with madmen. So I nod in agreement.
 Right.
 So what happens when the actor surpasses the moment that the prototype died?
 Bravo.\nPerhaps that is the instant when their nature changes. The actor gets into the role so deeply, they become the original.\nIf charged particles can charge their nature, why wouldn't the same apply to the people charged with the same idea, dream, or bad fortune?
 Wait a second… Where's the real person, then?
 Yup. You're a certified madman.
 You've reached deeper into human nature than a surgeon…
 Why do you think there's only one, that they're limited by a single body?\nThis is the abyss we need to step over to reinvent death. That's how I see it.
 What's the abyss?
 It's perspective. You're mistaking a moth in a spider web on your window for a monster on the hill. Remember that story?
 I do.
 I don't.
 It <i>is</i> the monster.
 Because everyone fails. Sixteen failed attempts. Sixteen! They keep dying… meaning they never learn. Never understand what death is.
 What is there to understand?
 Don't give me that smirk… You think you're different?\nFine. Go ahead, prove it. Finish the play without dying. Become yourself.
 But there must be a real Burakh out there somewhere… Right?
 Thanks. I'll go now. The world has spoiled some more, I've become weaker, and so on, and so on, I know.
 Perhaps. But… unlikely. The real Burakh died not so long ago. Although…
 I've been wondering. If there are both actors and real people in the streets… can an actor meet their prototype?
 I know better than you if he died or not.
 I don't understand. Either we're doing great, or we're utterly failing. And it doesn't depend on me anymore. Only on you.
 You're a strange man, you know. Perhaps you set all this up deliberately?
 …Are you human?
 You're ascribing diabolical capabilities to me. Please give credit where it's due—which is to say, to yourself.\nI'm blameless. "All this," as you put it, started because of you, not me. I just took the chance to experiment in the heart of this… triumph of death.
 …Oh, so I'm at fault?
 Of course. You're a doctor. You could've prevented it, like your father did back then. But you haven't.\nWhich I deeply appreciate! Five years ago, it rang false precisely because there was no triumph of death. We didn't let it into the Town. No one was truly horrified. The actors didn't have time for realizations…
 A good actor doesn't need to be scared to act out horror convincingly.
 You truly are mad.
 But my actors are bad! Unprofessional amateurs. We're in a hellhole, remember? I mean, look at yourself! That's what I have to work with.\nI'd like to be omnipotent! But… I'm just an exhausted, desperate director. Nothing more.
 Seriously…?
 You solve your problems. I solve mine.
 It's an experiment, isn't it? So shut up and take it in stride.
 Can't you tell? If I weren't, I'd never be stuck in this hellhole…
 You set it all up. Why?
 Burakh. I, too, get exhausted running the same scene with you again and again. If you don't care about yourself, have mercy on me, at least.
 I'm not doing this on purpose…
 Isn't it supposed to be different each time?
 So that's one way to achieve immortality?
 What does that have to do with immortality? We're seeking transcendence, not immortality. You do understand it's not the same?
 I don't.
 I think Georgiy Kain said something to that extent…
 Oh, physics… Never thought you'd be interested in it.
 …And you've never seen me before. Yeah, I remember.
 I don't.
 A personality.
 A soul.
 Use yours, then.
 Gladly.
 What if I define a person as a body?
 This is too complicated for me.
 I was dead. Now I'm alive. Who are you to make me come back all the time? What kind of trickery is this?
 I bet I do.
 Why?
 What do you mean "why"? To finish the run, of course.
 That's not what I mean. Every time I come here, you say it gets harder.
 I'm same as before, though. I didn't die.
 What's the point of the run?
 I won't wish you luck… I don't believe in it.
 Good luck.
 When they get into character.
 When they sympathize with them. I read that in a book once.
 I'm leaving, then.
 I see.
 Not exactly.\nIn truth, they believe we must reevaluate death, and change our very perception of it. See it not as a universal law, but as a solvable problem.\nSome abysses can be crossed by building bridges, and so on.
 Yeah. Something about limits.
 In addition, when you cease to consider yourself as a person, as a name, as a body, you elude its impact. By measuring yourself not in names, but in attempts, you become invulnerable to death.
 So that's how death is defeated in your play?
 People overcome death by pushing the limits of self-understanding.\nSuch as the limits that make a person perceive themselves as a body, instead of a sum of knowledge connected through unique associations. Consider yourself as being more like a kaleidoscope, and your life will become… not compelling, exactly, but… <i>more.</i>
 I'm a surgeon. To me, living creatures <i>are</i> bodies.
 Well, how very sad for you. As long as you perceive yourself as a body, you will die over and over.\nIn our play, a living creature is made of many bodies at once. Which is what makes observing the sand pest so fascinating! Like any epidemic, it's structured according to the same principles.
 Oh. So you've noticed it, too.
 That's not important. What matters is that I overcome my finite nature by dividing myself, then creating connections within that new creature.\nWithout connections, everything is pointless. Like you all, with all your attempts. You're connected by playing the same role!
 Connections… Sure. Now I see.
 He didn't die, though. He dissolved into many living people.
 Getting closer to ritual cannibalism, I see.
 Come now. Don't take it so literally.\nThen again, so long as you equate a person with a body, cannibalism would remain your only way to overcome death. Absurd. False.
 Simon was not afraid of death. He accepted it.
 Are you sure you're a director? You sound like a priest.
 In that case, suicide would have been the best way to defeat death. But it's been scientifically proven that suicide is the shortest road to oblivion.\nDeath must be overcome, not rejected. This is not the way. If you think you can avoid burns by leaping into fire, you're sillier than I thought.
 Uh huh. You're clearly very intelligent, though.
 Like I'm the one burdening you with those rocks!
 Then who? Death itself? Teaching me to overcome it, to push limits?
 Death teaches nothing. It only waits. It's an abyss, without will.\nThe plague teaches. The Town teaches. <i>Conflict</i> is educational. Such was Simon and Isidor's plan.
 Why make it harder? What's the point?
 Wait. What plan?
 I can give you several answers. \nA) It's not up to me.\nB) I'm doing this to mess with you.\nC) It doesn't matter. What matters is how you profit from it.\nD) So that you'd stop dying and finish your damn role!\nWhich one do you choose? Go ahead.
 None. I'll keep walking along my path.
 None. I'll just start over. Consider me weak all you want.
 Dividing a person into a person and a person. Dividing a person into an assembly of separate—though connected—moments. Dividing a person into the sum of those who perceive and interpret their actions.\nDid I miss anything?
 You missed a lot, and not for the first time.
 You know… I'm beginning to enjoy it.
 I mean that the path has a clear direction, like a bridge over the abyss. The bridge is a line made of many segments. They overlap, ensuring its continuity and growth. The overlapping creates a single entity.
 A bridge, huh…
 We're in mourning today. Lost yet another one. I'm glad you came to replace them. Perhaps this time, we'll make more progress.
 Is it that important?
 Like… cutting them?
 A person splits into many versions of themselves. They are a sum. A sum of many attempts to overcome death, many versions of their path.\nI'm mostly curious about how this path is linear and nonlinear at the same time.
 And each version is a bit smarter than their predecessor, aren't they?
 Why?
 The abyss is endless. You'll build your bridge forever.
 If that's what you choose to think, you might as well leap right into the abyss. Me, I'd rather try.
 You know, I keep leaping, but nothing seems to work.
 Just saying.
 The Kains, too, love to blindly leap—into anything, anywhere, really, so long as they don't have to remain in one place.
 Well, what are the others? I don't like yours.
 I do measure myself as the sum of my deeds.
 …Yet your predecessors were all too eager to convince me they were Artemy Burakh. They got into the role the traditional way. They got too attached to the name.
 Consistency is not a bad thing. Don't try to manipulate me out of it.
 I didn't say anything like that, though.
 I don't want to listen to this. You're a madman. You're a spider, luring people into your web.
 I only have one answer to whatever you have to say: no.
 Oh. So the bridge thing was their term? I thought it sounded familiar.
 "A life that is more." A more direct life, a life <i>across…</i> 
 So you <i>like</i> the sand pest…
 I'm alone. I'm still alone.
 I wonder how you intend to do that.
 You'll see.
 An old trick. "Don't think of a polar bear." Wounding me with a word, like a splinter, so my mind would see confirmations everywhere?
 Exploring the limits of your actors once again?
 What? No. Nothing to explore there.\nLimits are supposed to be pushed, not explored. That's what I'm doing. I don't care about their exact nature.
 So you bind us tighter and tighter with all these additional conditions.
 That's true, I suppose…
 Can I just sit here for a while?
 No, it isn't.
 Am I supposed to stop fearing death?
 Not even remotely. How could you? Death is repulsive.\nWe're looking for a sustainable way to… step over it. Not even <i>run</i> from death—as you clearly know, that would fail. By the way, which attempt is this? Thirteen, isn't it?
 Then what? If I take risks and confront death head-on, all I get is another rock tied around my ankle! How is that logical?
 I don't know. I didn't count.
 No. <i>I</i> haven't died once.
 You just don't know what you want.
 Oops. Too early. The play itself isn't mine, haven't I mentioned? They wrote the script. I'm just an interpreter. A prompter.\nYou're Artemy Burakh, right? So follow your father's path. That's your Line for now. Your bridge over the abyss. Build it, and it'll all come together. Unless the rocks drag you down.
 Why have rocks at all, though? I don't understand.
 They… "wrote the script"? No. Father wouldn't have.
 Drivel. You're wrong.
 Then how do I profit from this?
 I guess I'm just the stupid performer… Time to try on the costume.
 I don't know. I just feel this way.\nTo overcome death, you must come in close contact with it. But you won't defeat it by climbing into its maw, nor by running. It's different.\nHow? I don't know! If I did, why bother with all this? You tell me: How?
 I don't know, either!
 Don't yell at me.
 I'll figure it out.
 After thinking about it, I agree about the contact.
 Our cells are constantly renewed. Bones, too—although slower. In ten years, my body won't have a single piece of the current me.
 What about mine?
 It's up to you.
 Same.
 Not yours. Because you're not human.
 I guess not. It's your play, after all. It has nothing to do with real life.
 Still, I think the experiment was a success.
 What makes you think so?
 No.
 Tell that to the families of the victims.
 I just do. I'm neither philosopher nor scientist. I am, as one rude person has once put it, a clown. What is there to demand from a clown? \nBut I sense it was a success. Death is powerless when viewed like this.
 It's not about dividing a person; it's about the connections between the divided parts, and how new pieces grow from the old.
 Wise. That answer is very much yours. What will continue you?
 My children.
 Should I lend you a revolver, then? Think of death the way you just described, press it to your temple, and pull the trigger. I'll watch and write the clinical report.
 The ones who trust me.
 The thing I love.
 The ones who love me.
 My town.
 My people.
 My character.
 Earth.
 None of your business.
 Connections, then?
 You and I understand the word differently, though.
 Yes. Connections.
 The Lines, if you will.
 Associations, if you prefer the term.
 My Half chose me when I was three. It's their choice, not ours.
 And what is your Half? A little grass snake?
 Fair enough. Thanks for the pills.
 A chaffinch. Only I haven't seen her in a year.
 She's just shy.
 Don't worry. She'll show herself.
 Aren't you a bit too young to play in the Warehouses?
 He's not a scout. He's an aide. I mean, I can't just expel him, can I? But we don't let the little ones anywhere dangerous.
 Says the big one.
 Let's say I believed you.
 Look who's talking.
 Don't talk back to me.
 Anyway. You gave the right order.
 There are three doctors in town. Dankovsky, a theorist; a girl who performs miracles; and me, a surgeon. That's all.
 I'm not sure… but it comes from below the ground.
 Explain.
 …I can't. I don't know. I'm not yet sure that my eyes haven't deceived me.
 Those aren't tall tales!
 I have a sample.
 How much?
 How much blood do I have? Too little.
 A droplet.
 What does that mean?
 …I haven't really figured it out myself yet.
 I don't know.
 I know where to look… but I don't yet understand how it will help.
 That's not what you said about Grace. With her, you specifically asked for my help.
 Yes… but that was different. That was about her alone. Now I'm speaking of all our children, the whole <i>tagloor.</i> I sense you won't be able to protect them.
 You might be right, but what can be done?
 I will. I'll guard them with my life.
 So… there's no need for me to hurry and help Grace? You'll manage that on your own? And cure the sick, too?
 …There's no need to be like that. You know that's not what I meant.
 What did you mean, then?
 When… when <i>the</i> trouble comes for them, let me be the one to shield them. Not you. All right? I'll speak to it myself.
 Speak to <i>what?</i> Victoria, there's an outbreak! To save anyone, I need to work, to make the cure—not argue abstract ideas.
 Rain at seven, fine at eleven.
 It doesn't ask who it should visit.
 Have you made it already, then? Or are you like that fancy big-city doctor, claiming that all we need for salvation is chemistry?\nHe's a nonbeliever. But you're a better man. You know the world is more complicated than that. So believe <i>me!</i>
 Believe what?
 I've had enough of this nonsense. Everyone who entrusted their lives to me remains under my protection. Including you.
 I hope we never get a chance to find out.
 If… if I had let you take them away from me back then, would it have turned out differently?
 I don't know. I can't see anything now…
 Damn it… Damn it!
 It's all right. I can. I see a long and happy life ahead of you.
 Andrey is dead, too. I'm sorry.
 Oh… there's no need then. Peter will give it to his brother himself…
 I'm sorry.
 He will. They're inseparable even in death.
 What do you want from half a man?
 I wanted to give you this key.
 Nothing. I just wanted to… ah, forget it.
 What's this?
 I don't know.
 It's Peter's. A girl gave it to me… She must have found it among his things.
 A secret.
 ……
 What does this key open?
 I'm sorry.
 A girl lives at his place now… but I'll take care of her myself. Don't worry.
 …
 Shut up.
 …
 Don't be rude.
 Thank you. And shut up! Shove your condolences up your ass. I despise insincerity.\nI understand now. He knew everything. All these years. It's surreal…\nThank you. Now go.
 Will you tell me what this is all about?
 My condolences are sincere.
 No.
 Fair enough. I won't pry.
 You know, that girl… Grace. She can touch the dead with her mind. If the grief becomes unbearable, you may consider paying her a visit.
 Remember how we went to the House of Death? It did protect a district from infection… Turns out you were right.
 We knew what Lika deserved. We'd spare him anyway, I think.\nBut you said the right thing back then. Changed our lives. Killing is never acceptable. Ever.
 Ever.
 If only I followed this rule myself…
 So I'll make sure you live too. Got it?
 Khan is dead. He got infected—not today, earlier… because of me.
 The liquid kind?
 Protect her.
 …That's your impression? No one's ever called me that.
 You've never spoken to an inquisitor before.
 Fair enough.
 What makes you say that?
 It's obvious.
 You inquisitors are strange.
 Well, you guessed right.
 I'm listening.
 You're not planning to give me orders?
 No, doctor. \nAre you a courier? An aide? An assistant? A secretary? Or else did you assume I'd point you to one location with all the answers, and all you'd have to do is stroll over there?
 I don't need you today, doctor.
 Oh… but you told me to report to you daily.
 I'm talking to someone else now. Haven't you noticed? He's there in the corner.
 I haven't.
 Or do you have something to report? Have you made any progress in your search?
 Maybe you could advise me?
 What…from here?
 I have made progress.
 You're an inquisitor. You know more than I do. Maybe you've found a lead.
 Those who can only follow crosses on a map have already received my orders. They're of no interest to me. And they won't solve our problem.\nI'm relying on those who can think for themselves. Don't disappoint me.
 The cross is the Abattoir, but I don't know how to get inside.
 I've made progress.
 I didn't say that.
 I'm not free, I'm confused. And unsure what to do.
 Are we solving the same problem, I wonder?
 I'll try.
 Report.
 Oyun, the Foreman of the Abattoir, is back from the steppe. He might know something.
 I think I should look into the Abattoir…
 Your Oyun knows nothing. He tried to find those… brontosauruses of yours in the steppe, only to learn they're extinct. Any more bright ideas?
 I need to go to the Abattoir. I've always wanted to.
 Do you know what you'd be looking for? Or is it just a shot in the dark?
 A shot in the dark.
 I'm relying on Oyun. He promised to find out…
 We have no time for hope and luck, Burakh! No time at all!
 Then tell me what to do.
 I know.
 I've made some progress.
 Not yet.
 I'm not saying anything.
 I've made some progress.
 Did you really ascend the Polyhedron yesterday?
 No. I studied its base. Collected information. Interrogated people.\nWould you like a written report?
 You should climb it one day. The sky above is very special.
 If I say yes, would you draw one up?
 What does the Tower have to do with the First Outbreak?
 Khan is alive. I'll drag him out in the end.
 I'm glad you're alive too.
 I hope you're right.
 So you wouldn't come after us.
 …I'm stunned by your logic. And where are you? Where's that place I'm not supposed to follow you to?
 "Completely"? That's uncanny…
 The "Rose"?
 The Polyhedron. The Tower. The Wind Rose.
 Like hell it'll protect you if you keep running across infected districts.
 The general believed you? General Block? No way.
 Yes.
 You're mad… but there is a way.
 If there is a bombardment, we're all doomed anyway.
 True… now let me talk to the others.
 Mature reasoning.
 You were so worried about safety… but now you're back. Changed your mind?
 The district below is infected. Anyone sick among you?
 Don't talk about Khan like that. He's alive.
 Yes. For now. But he's sick. He must not get close to children. Not here.
 I'll cure him.
 He's still a child himself. Both of you are.
 Won't it topple over? There are a lot of children in the Town…
 Will you be happy in there?
 The Polyhedron is all smoke and mirrors. A giant soap bubble. I hate it… \nBut my feelings matter very little now. The plague can't get inside—that's a fact. It will offer protection. You, on the other hand, have just crossed an infected district. So I won't let you near the children. They're my responsibility.
 What are you doing, Victoria…?
 Is there no other shelter?
 Are the graves overflowing?
 Do they hurt…?
 Well, those horrors have visited us as well… but I'd rather not tell you about it.
 They don't burn us, only smother.
 They'll have to manage. I'll find a way to take you away from here.
 Are you sure that's a good idea?
 Glad to hear it.
 Of course. Is there any doubt?
 Grace is an unusual girl. She has different needs than other kids.
 She's a neurotic kid. Moving her to a different place could traumatize her.
 The townsfolk respect her. If Grace were removed from the cemetery, chaos could ensue. And that's the last thing we want now.
 She belongs here.
 I always have doubt…
 Oh, come to your senses, Doctor Burakh! Do you even know the girl's name?
 It's Grace…
 What is it?
 "Grace" is just a nickname. She's nameless. She has no documents… Her father and mother were twyrine drunks, they never bothered.\nShe can't read or write. Eats whatever she picks off the ground. She's living like a weed!
 Why call her a "weed"? Precious herbs grow in the cemetery, too.
 There are lots of orphans and urchins in our Town. What's one more?
 But what if she likes it this way?
 You're right… I don't know what got into me.
 What will become of her when she grows up? Or—oh, this is simpler—in winter, when it drops below <i>zero?</i>\nHere, the only path ahead of her is one that leads right down into graveyard soil.
 You're right.
 There's nothing wrong with soil. Leave Grace alone.
 Thanks, I guess.
 Survivor
 I'll need a weapon.
 Biscuit brought pups. One was stillborn, but the rest are doing great.
 Sounds good.
 So those are the candy wrappers my Fellow Traveler was selling…
 Candy wrappers? Actual candy wrappers… Huh.
 Are you gonna take today's map of infected districts?
 You're on it again!
 No.
 I don't like this...
 Not right now. I'll drop by later. I guess.
 Without Rubin, this place is a circus…
 You're late!
 You do that. I need a breath of fresh air…
 Perhaps there is a reseller skulking in some shadows… Profiteers have no good conscience. Only, I don't want anything to do with it!
 A reseller, huh…
 Fine, fine. Just don't bite my head off.
 What pack…? You mistook me for someone.
 But your leader is dead…
 Yeah…\nBut the Tower still stands. Ishka is in charge now.
 I'm sorry.
 Notkin's Soul-and-a-Halves. How in the world did you miss them? They ramble about you all the time…
 That's a different gang of children, isn't it?
 I'm not interested in your games.
 No. And I never had one.
 Welp, then you won't have it in the future, either.\nGuess you missed your chance to befriend the Soul-and-a-Halves, doctor. Now you won't be able to betray them and switch to my side.\nWhat a goof! Forget it. I'll look elsewhere.
 What a horrible turn of events.
 I'll think about it.
 I don't play your games.
 The sound was coming from this room.
 Not you.
 Well, I've removed the boards. You're free to go.
 This town wasn't this absurd before.
 Victor Kain
 Victor Kain
 
 
 Yulia Lyuricheva
 
 
 Yulia Lyuricheva
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Where one fingernail was used, now two are needed. We won't accept you in our boats for one anymore.
 Why?
 I never expected you of all people to profiteer…
 You're exaggerating.
 I came here to talk to you on Sahba's behalf, yargachin. I am her rough hand, her wise heart, her heavy word.
 Sahba? Who is that?
 Why hasn't she come herself?
 She's in her hut. The plague speaks to her. She was waiting for you here, but you took too long to come.
 I was busy.
 Sahba Usp'tae. Aspity. Our leader. Our protector. Our teacher. She loved your father, yargachin.
 Why hasn't she come herself?
 I'm listening.
 Wow…
 Somehow, I felt like this disease couldn't touch her.
 Sahba would have said many words, wise words. I am bad at speech. My words are simple.\nYou have come into your father's inheritance. You are a menkhu. The Kin acknowledge you as a Burakh.
 I don't need your acknowledgment. I <i>am</i> a Burakh.
 This is what matters.
 I don't need your acknowledgment. I <i>am</i> a Burakh.
 This is what matters.
 Do you want me to fix your lamp?
 They put her six feet under, but no one knows where. You don't know, either?
 I don't.
 Why do you ask me?
 Not you. The Kin.
 You're standing in Sahba's place.
 I don't know. He hardly expected things to go south so quickly… and I don't think he knew about the plague. Only, what does it matter now?
 Nothing.
 His intentions still matter.
 I'll take care of him myself. Cure him. Don't worry.
 Just don't get too close to him, all right? He can hear your lullaby from afar just fine.
 It already has come. It's too late for psalms now.
 Anything untouched by infected hands!
 It's the other way round. The steppe people despise cremation.
 Any trickle of blood seeps from Olonngo. From the Abattoir. Always. Blood means the Abattoir.
 Then I need to go there.
 All right. I'm ready to go.
 You're too rash, emshen. Too hasty. I'm standing right in front of you—I can tell you haven't opened the udkhar properly, haven't touched the items inside.
 I won't understand anything without your help, anyway.
 I'm sorry.
 Do you need your hand held, like a child? Is that the Line a Burakh follows?\nFine. If you don't want to touch it, then listen. In the udkhar, that is now yours, are several blades of various herbs and a piece of paper. On that piece, there's a list of names. I haven't touched it with my eyes.
 Why has Father left me herbs?
 Please read the list now. What are those names?
 Hey, noukherne! Be khara, you are a good man. Buy my bull.
 Bayarlaa, noukherne. How much do you want for it?
 Why would I want a bull?
 It's as good as free. Three hundred.
 Cheap indeed. Is it stolen?
 I don't have that much.
 It's not just any bull. It brings luck. When the time comes, it'll tell you what to do.
 Can it talk then?
 Forget bulls! Be khara, you could be an air seller.
 You offend me, Khatangher. Not stolen; it's just that money is needed more than bulls these days.
 How come?
 Unente, it is known: It will talk on the scariest day of your life, showing you the right way.\nEh, kharaldaa, I'd rather not have it at all. Perhaps there won't be a scary day in my life, then.
 That's some funny logic, like you're starting to believe your own tall tale. The scary day will come whether you have a bull or not. It's not his life, but yours.
 To be honest, I think you're just a swindler, noukherne.
 So you're selling a curse on four legs? Sweet. I'll take if from you if <i>you</i> pay <i>me.</i>
 Take him for two hundred. It's a good bull. Be khara, it'll be useful to you.
 You're out of your mind, Khatangher. Find yourself another fool.
 All right, have it your way. I'll buy it.
 I'm leaving the Town, forever. Can't take him with me. It hurts me to sell him, but I don't have a choice. Buy my bull, kholboön!
 What's so special about it?
 What's so special about your bull?
 I'd buy it, but I don't have the money on me. Can you wait here?
 No, khayaala. I can't wait. Guess it's not in the cards then.
 Guess it's not.
 That's all right. You'll find another buyer for your treasure.
 I'd buy it, but I don't have the money on me. Can you wait here?
 Now, that's news. What's going on? Why is the area locked off?
 People say, something happened at the Factory. Like… an emission. Toxic soot in the air. Makes your eyes water in a minute… wouldn't be smart to go in without protection.
 And what does your beloved Dankovsky say?
 What kind of protection?
 He says, "The district is locked down and off limits to anyone but doctors. Vorakh allowed."
 <i>Burakh.</i> He sure has memory issues, doesn't he?
 So do I just walk into the soot? Just like that?
 Come on, take the pills. Here, a handful, for everything. Just make sure you figure out which one to give him, all right? The correct one will probably do the trick?
 Hand them over, I'll take a look.
 Not every condition can be cured with a pill.
 Diagnostics is a finicky process… but I'll try.
 I'm sorry I haven't helped, kid. I failed you.
 Can't be helped now… The big-city dandy said from the start that Patches was doomed. Guess he was right.
 I wanted to help you. I really did. Just… didn't work out.
 So you still trust me?
 We've met already! Have you drunk yourself amnesiac?
 And one more thing. The plague moves stealthily—it has no need to speak of its arrival in a place.\nWhen plague's by windows, people are at risk. But on the morrow other districts will be touched, and you must find them out yourself. So watch the Town's condition close, Burakh.
 It's not dice then, it's hide-and-seek.
 I hope there's less of it tomorrow.
 Soldier
 Peter Stamatin
 
 
 
 I think it's time to pay a visit to the Lair.
 Is Notkin in trouble? Not him…
 Young Vlad wants to see me.
 The blood for the panacea is underground. The whole Town stands on blood… How do I acquire it?
 I don't suppose I'll ever find out what Rubin made his cure from. But strange blood seeps from the ground by the Ear.\n\nShekhen. The Ear is in Shekhen.
 So Rubin's not at home, either. Not unexpected.\n\nGuess I'll have to ask the sly one, who is supposedly aware of everyone's comings and goings…
 "A." Nothing here is up to you, you clown…
 "B," of course. I knew it from the start. All this talk about death is just the raving of a power-mad insect. You're the insect.
 I know how I profit from this. One must be tough enough to withstand death's proximity if they are to face it often. That's the only way, isn't it?
 It's probably "C"... "Death is overcome through the force of spirit." "The braver the opponent, the more seriously death takes them." Something lofty like that?
 You're flattering me, sir, by speaking about me and not yourself. You think I'm important here?
 I think that's what you think.
 You're not.
 Some people here have no hands at all.
 I'm a decent doctor.
 Empty. Good. Let the dead take care of themselves.
 The Olgimskys' mansion stands empty now. The Kin has no more masters.
 Truly vacant now. No one shall disturb the depths anymore.
 
 The Olgimskys' mansion. Big Vlad is no more. Now his son lives here, dreaming of a better fate.
 Sometimes people who've lost their homes to the outbreak find shelter here. Such was Gravel's last request.
 My father's house. My house. I've no intention to live here.
 Mishka
 
 Eva Yan
 I tried to help Rubin, but it wasn't enough.\n\nWho killed him? The Kin, who spilled no blood? His conscience, which could never find peace? The friend, who failed in his task, my task?\n\nIt doesn't matter, I suppose. In the end, Stakh is dead.
 
 I came to pay my last respects to your father. Don't force me out.
 Did you know him?
 Who am I to force you out?
 You'll just crawl back in anyway.
 I didn't. He was already dead when I arrived.
 So you're just doing it for appearances.
 Why did you come, then?
 I talk to people a lot. And they said a lot of good things about your father.\nTalking to people is my greatest skill, you know. They open up. And turn from puppets to—
 —independent people?
 —actual living humans?
 Are you going to live here now?
 Not right now. I don't want to sleep where blood was spilled.
 No. This house is unclean.
 Live here yourself, if you want.
 I want to understand him.
 Why?
 
 
 
 
 Rifle Ammo
 ???
 Crumpled Letter
 The paper is torn. The writing, barely legible.
 "Remember that time at the Scruff? You said fate doesn't choose people, but people choose fate. So I have. I'm glad you're not here. Would have been scarier with you. I—"\n\nThe rest is unreadable.
 
 Confession Note
 If I didn't know Lara's handwriting so well, I wouldn't have noticed her hand was trembling.
 "I, Lara Ravel, conceived the murder of General Block alone. No one knew of my plans. If anyone called Rubin, Burakh, or Filin claims to be my accomplice, disregard them. I've done it myself." 
 
 Note to Old Man
 Written by a kid. Touch to read it.
 "The invisible cat was seen in the Warehouses. It can be caught during the day on good days. Uncle Old Man, do you know if it can be someone's Half? If so, we can't touch it."
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Begging Note
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Farewell Letter
 A crumpled piece of paper. Smells like a marsh, for some reason. Touch to read it.
 "Who can tally the number of drops in the sea?\nWho can tally the number of tears in this grief? \n\nI'm so happy it wasn't you, Father.\n\n-Veronica Croy."
 
 
 Key With No Lock
 It's a secret. It has "F." scratched on it.
 Small. It's a key to a box or a drawer, not a door. It reflects light at odd angles.
 
 "Dragonfly Eye"
 An incredibly rare concoction made of twyre berries. When consumed, it reveals several points of interest in the Town.
 Twyre berries are rarely picked. Few people ever see this potion. Perhaps fate is thanking me for lending someone assistance in the past?
 
 Old "Shmowder"
 I suspect I know what it does. Better keep it in case times get rough.
 This "shmowder" is very old, made ten years ago, or even more. It's imbued with warm gratitude.
 
 An old steppe village. Alive once again.
 I came into my legacy… sort of. I traced Father's path. I will take care of his patients. I've proven by deeds that I know the Lines.\n\nI still can't believe the "shmowder" helped. I don't think I'll be this lucky in the future.\n\nBut everyone considers me a menkhu now.
 So... I'll have to work right here? On the stage?
 Same as everyone, sir. Same as everyone.
 All right. What do I need to know?
 No. Keep it.
 It's a good gun, I suppose. Never checked. I only carried it for show. So they'd fear me...\nThat's how it works, y'know. They won't try anythin' as long as they're afraid. Won't get cocky, won't make you rein them in. Won't make you use the gun...
 Sly. And even noble, in a way.
 ...But they've lost fear.
 Grief, you're a moron! Carrying a shotgun "for show", really...
 Let's assume he did. How do I examine one?
 Are <i>you</i> asking <i>me,</i> doctor?\nI guess you take a sample. Then... hold it to the light? Taste it? And run to professor Dankovsky to report if anything is off.
 Could you drag a barrel to a different location for me? It'd be easier to check there. And I don't think I can move a barrel on my own...
 Already running. At breakneck speed.
 Why? Examine it here. Unless you find a suspicious barrel... then experiments are mandatory, I guess?
 So you would relocate a suspicious one? Got it.
 I'll inspect barrels first. decide later.
 I have a bad feeling about this...
 How did they let you in here with a gun?
 It has no ammo. And, well...
 What?
 Well?
 Put him in prison. Let him stay there. It's safer that way.
 It's not him. I'm sure of it. You can release him now.
 That, Burakh, is ultimately not your decision. I only wanted your opinion. I will do with him as I see fit.
 Very well.
 I'll find the murderer myself, Governor. I trust myself more.
 Then my opinion is this: Prison's no place for an innocent man.
 I already have.
 Don't. It wasn't him. We've talked.
 You know what... have this gun. It's of no use to me anymore, and you seem to be fast on the draw.
 Is this... a shotgun? And here I thought you weren't a murderer after all.
 How did they let you in here with a gun?
 What do you mean, "no use"? I don't like the look on your mug. Keep it.
 It's a good gun, I suppose. Never checked. I only carried it for show. So they'd fear me...\nThat's how it works, y'know. They won't try anythin' as long as they're afraid. Won't get cocky, won't make you rein them in. Won't make you use the gun...
 Sly. And even noble, in a way.
 ...But they've lost fear.
 Grief, you're a moron! Carrying a shotgun "for show", really...
 It has no ammo. And, well...
 What?
 Dead? But how? I've cured him, I saw him get better with my own eyes!
 What cure did you use?\nClara says, the thing you gave him gnawed at him from the inside, so his organism just gave. He was very weak... "Some medicine is worse than poison," she said.
 Damn these shmowders...
 Clara says a lot of things.
 Yeah… figured that out already.
 I see… good that I left her be, then.
 Give me a minute.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't heal completely, but lowers the chance of death.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Flesh, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from infected blood.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected kidney.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected liver.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected heart.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Blood Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from infected brain tissue.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Blood.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from infected blood.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected kidney.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't heal completely, but lowers the chance of death.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Flesh, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected heart.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from infected brain tissue.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't heal completely, but lowers the chance of death.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Flesh, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Nerve Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected liver.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured, if one can find which Layer it has poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Nerves.
 I can buy a toolkit here.\n\n…Or I can distract the merchant with conversation, so Sticky has enough time to rob the shop—free of charge.
 How do wrong pills help? They don't reduce infection.
 I see. What else is rewarded?
 They provide care and hope. It's not just the plague that's killing the Town, but the panic, too. If your pill doesn't help with the former, at least it alleviates the latter somewhat...\nAlthough correctly administered antibiotics will be rewarded more generously.
 Got it. What else is rewarded?
 Assisting Bachelor Dankovsky, of course.
 I knew it! Everything has to be about him, doesn't it?
 Great. What about the deranged girl? Am I supposed to assist her too?
 So one is free to loot the districts abandoned by the plague? That's useful to know.
 Useful how? What are you up to?
 Nothing. So there are looters in Father's house, huh?
 A shameless doctor is more useful than a dead one.
 I've heard what the little morons are up to… If only they washed their hands half as eagerly as they draw maps!
 I already know… They were looking for trouble and found it. Paid for it with their leader's life. Come on. We need to get back to work.
 I don't know... Come on, turn that frown upside down! Just pay more attention to the people in your care. \nLike Sticky... I thought we'd meet here. Like we did at your place. But I can't find him...
 Damn...
 You'll find him, kid. I swear.
 He has.
 So?
 Perhaps it would be smart of you to take some interest? Seeing how they're taking interest in your hide.
 Where are you taking them? Answer me, you ghoul!
 He mentioned a riot brewing there...
 You said the Termitary was locked because of a riot. Was that a lie?
 You said the Termitary was locked because of a riot. Was that a lie?
 That look on your face... I don't like it.
 Did those six years of study go over your head completely? "Infected" and "healthy" are just words. But everything is interconnected in a body.\nA healthy organ might be showing first signs of infection. Conversely, it might already have developed antibodies…
 You're right. Everything is connected in a body; all three Layers.
 I doubt we're capable of examining anything at this level without a real lab…
 I haven't graduated.
 
 
 
 Taya's Throne
 Soon, the most luxurious yurt our town has ever seen will be built here.
 
 Yes… I've seen your Reflection.
 It sucks without the chief. Some folks have already scattered... you know how it goes. Jester yowls at night...\nBut the scouts are still going strong. And I won't leave for the Tower either. Screw it.
 So you didn't replace Notkin with another leader?
 Why?
 I'm sorry...
 No.
 I respect that.
 You should have.
 Why won't you go to the Tower?
 Eh... I've been there. The Tower makes everything too easy. Any dream, any fantasy—you name it. It's like living on candy. One needs soup, too...\nDown here is where life is.
 Impressively reasonable.
 Down here is where death is.
 They why are you so gloomy?
 Father vaccinated the town? What are you talking about?
 Oh, so you haven't figured it out? Well... I suppose it's fair. The past is a complicated material, capricious and hard to bend. Not all people know how to work with it—and uncover it.\nWe will not talk of this matter.
 Is your Polyhedron a thing of the past, too?
 Yeah... it's my own fault. I failed to do everything.
 In that case, go to hell.
 They're dead. I don't want to talk about it.
 I am alive.
 Yes. You're alive.
 So is the Town.
 You understood nothing, Kindred. You've failed to reach the Kin's heart. Failed to brave its depths, touch the shared pulse... you've abandoned your quest half-way.
 Say it straight: failed to find out who killed Father.
 I didn't have the time. I was trying to save the children.
 Their heart was too hard to reach. I got confused.
 Wrong. I've touched the heart of the udurgh.
 That's not what I'm talking about. I meant the people. You've failed to blend in and merge with us.
 I never wanted to merge with the Kin.
 I had no time.
 How will you live now, Kindred?
 What about you?
 On my own.
 So who killed Father?
 No, Kindred. Ask no questions.\nPerhaps in another life it would all have gone differently. And we'd have a different conversation. But now... leave me. Your town waits for you.
 I grieve for the Earth too... Kindred.
 But we only have one life.
 I am alive.
 Yes. You're alive.
 Everything is alive now...
 You understood nothing, Kindred. You've failed to reach the Kin's heart. Failed to brave its depths, touch the shared pulse... you've abandoned your quest half-way.
 Wrong. I've touched the heart of the udurgh.
 Say it straight: failed to find out who killed Father.
 I didn't have the time. I was trying to save the children.
 Their heart was too hard to reach. I got confused.
 That's not what I'm talking about. I meant the people. You've failed to blend in and merge with us.
 I never wanted to merge with the Kin.
 I had no time.
 How will you live now, Kindred?
 What about you?
 So who killed Father?
 Alongside everything else. Everything is alive now... madness.
 No, Kindred. Ask no questions.\nPerhaps, in another life it would all have gone differently. And we'd have a different conversation. But now... leave me.
 See you soon... Kindred.
 But we only have one life.
 You are triumphant now, Kindred. Yet time will pass… and you will find yourself upturned. What was once atop the wheel, will find itself dragged down. You'll see. Tiimel dee.
 I'm leaving you here, Foreman of the Abattoir.
 Baarhani, baarhani…
 I'm not triumphant. Not at all.
 I wish they wouldn't have stayed… leaving was safer.
 There's no one to check on.
 Not yet.
 You're right. I know what to do. And for that, I need to find a courier carrying orders from the inquisitor. Have you seen him?
 No. Now is not the time to discuss feeling. Tell me, have you seen a courier carrying papers to the general?
 I... I can't put it into words. Perhaps you can do it better?
 I was doing everything wrong all these days, you see. As if hoping for a miracle...
 The truth is, a choice will have to be made—whether I want it or not. Have you seen a courier carrying papers around?
 No. We must save ourselves—by acting. It's clear to me now. Have you seen a courier with papers around?
 The general said you've changed his mind... did you hypnotize him or something?
 That was one compelling discussion of war, then.
 Are you here on business, or what?
 I am.
 What has she done to you? I can't believe my ears…
 He looks transfixed... are you hypnotizing him? How did they even let you in?
 You'll have to bear with me some more. I need to talk to him, too.
 You're not the only salvation.
 And you said you were no shapeshifter. Said you were good!
 Calm down, will you? If I decide there is reason to worry, I'll hurry to Dankovsky with a sample of water instead of chatting with you.
 There's no point in trying any further options.
 There's no point in trying any further options.
 There's no point in trying any further options.
 There's no point in trying any further options.
 There's no point in trying any further options.
 Another family torn apart...
 I know. We've met already.
 No, kid. It wasn't that. But Notkin's better now.
 Chief Notkin's pack nest here. I can barter with them for a map of infected districts.
 
 
 
 
 Seems so.
 It's safe here. The Tower is impenetrable for the disease. We'll take care of ourselves—better than you did.
 Better than nothing.
 I understand. I'm leaving.
 Clara
 Teacher
 Khatangher
 It's not like you summoned me. My Line brought me here.
 You could… stay. Father's gone, but perhaps someone could take his place in your heart. Maybe you could become a father yourself. Things would turn around…
 Mishka
 
 Taya Tycheek
 Mishka
 
 Grace
 You'll get me nothing! Stay put. I'll find one myself.
 And one more thing...\nIn a moment, a group of soldiers will come here. If they see you, they'll shoot. They're not bad people! It's just... just... how it is.\nDon't attack them, all right? I'll deal with them myself. It's going to be fine, no one has to die... <i>if</i> you just leave this place quietly.
 Good people don't shoot innocents.
 And what exactly will you do? Read them from your good book? No. I have no choice but to protect you.
 Thanks for the warning, I guess.
 Are they coming for you?
 It's all because of me... I've done that to them. But they won't hurt me.\nPlease, if there is a sliver of trust in you, just leave! You can't talk to them, there's no other solution, only fight or flight! And there's no need to spill more blood...
 Yes... I am about to spill different blood.
 We'll see.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected kidney.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected liver.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from an infected heart.
 Lowers infection. Fixes the Bone Layer of the human body. Doesn't completely heal the patient, but lowers the chance of death. Made from infected brain tissue.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 I made this. I can still feel the warmth of my hands on the vial.\n\nA body consists of three Layers: Blood, Bones, and Nerves. Any affliction can be cured if one discovers which Layer has been poisoned.\n\nThis potion allows me to touch the Bones.
 For a "fingernail", can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking.
 Can transport a passenger to any other improvised quay, which is sometimes faster than walking. Costs two "fingernails" now.
 Sand Pest
 Alarmed One
 So if I barter at a loss, people would see me as a better person?
 Cures sand pest. Reminds me of older days.
 This "shmowder" is very old, made ten years ago, or even more. Which is impossible, since the First Outbreak only happened five years ago.
 Some things aren't bound to happen.
 Can it help?
 All kinds of things happen...
 I should keep an eye on my immunity in unclean districts. Wearing protective clothes is advised.
 Even though you'd love to.
 The Town Hall is no longer looking for me.
 A bone... so the victims were dogs?
 Who did you think they were?
 ...Nothing. So why did you ask me about revenge?
 This is absurd.
 Dogs? ...Oh, dogs! I see. So Lika poisoned your pets, huh?
 I can wait for two days. If you don't take it by then, I'll do business with someone else. My circumstances are humble.
 Two days... I don't even know what might happen to me in two hours!
 Not a sum easily earned in two days.
 Isidor must have taught you how to hear and pick medicinal herbs. They're in bloom now. And merchants in the Broken Heart would give you a decent price for them.
 Yeah, I know a thing or two about herbs.
 Fine. I'll be back tomorrow, or maybe even today.
 Can I at least take a look at the revolver?
 But...
 I doubt it. That knowledge is taboo. But I can find more morphine in the streets.
 Khatangher
 Odongh
 The music has died down.
 And you… so you got out of trouble on your own?
 I have. As you know, I’m good at cutting.
 So you don’t need me all that much, after all.
 I’m glad.
 I’m sorry I couldn’t help…
 Forget me, Cub. Do your thing. Save the Town. Work. How’s the panacea going? Any progress?
 I think so.
 What’s our job for today?
 Is this resignation I hear? I don’t like your tone.
 Tough luck.
 Why do you always have to be so difficult!
 So what’s our job for today?
 Dunno, it just trudges on...
 Nowhere, that's where.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Well, fellow traveler, you've made your choice. Go out there. I will act.
 I feel uneasy…
